See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265391213

Revealing the dynamic network structure of the Beck Depression Inventory-I]

Article in Psychological Medicine - September 2014

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291714001809 - Source: PubMed

CITATIONS
296

5 authors, including:
Laura Bringmann
University of Groningen
102 PUBLICATIONS 4,276 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

( Marcus Huibers
221 PUBLICATIONS 11,193 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Laura Bringmann on 10 April 2015.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

READS
941

Lotte Lemmens
Maastricht University

56 PUBLICATIONS 1,392 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Denny Borsboom

University of Amsterdam

349 PUBLICATIONS 50,161 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

ResearchGate
 Revealing the dynamic network structure of the Beck Depression Inventory-II

Laura F. Bringmann’:
Lotte H.J.M. Lemmens”
Marcus J.H. Huibers’°
Denny Borsboom’*
Francis Tuerlinckx!

' Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

7 Department of Clinical Psychological Science, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands
* Department of Clinical Psychology, VU University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
“Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Declaration of Interest

None

- Address for correspondence: Department Quantitative Psychology and Individual Differences; University of
Leuven; Tiensestraat 102 - box 3713; 3000 Leuven; Belgium; tel. +32163 26052; email:
laura.bringmann@ppw.kuleuven.be
 Abstract

Background: Structured interviews and questionnaires are important tools to screen for
Major Depressive Disorder. Recent research suggests that, in addition to studying the mean
level of total scores, researchers should focus on the dynamic relations among depressive
symptoms as they unfold over time. Using network analysis, this paper 1s the first to
investigate these patterns of short-term (1.e., session to session) dynamics for a widely used

psychological questionnaire for depression — the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II).

Method: With the newly developed vector autoregressive (VAR) multilevel method we

estimated the network of symptom dynamics that characterizes the BDI-II, based on repeated
administrations of the questionnaire to a group of depressed individuals who participated in a
treatment study of an average of 14 weekly assessments. Also the centrality of symptoms and

the community structure of the network were examined.

Results: The analysis showed that all BDI-II symptoms are directly or indirectly connected
through patterns of temporal influence. In addition, these influences are mutually reinforcing,
“loss of pleasure’ being the most central 1tem 1n the network. Community analyses indicated
that the dynamic structure of the BDI-II involves two clusters, which 1s consistent with earlier

psychometric analyses.

Conclusion: The network approach expands the range of depression research, making it
possible to investigate the dynamic architecture of depression and opening up a whole new
range of questions and analyses. Regarding clinical practice, network analyses may be used to
indicate which symptoms should be targeted, and in this sense may help in setting up

treatment strategies.
 Introduction

Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a complex and burdensome mental health disorder
made up of a wide variety of symptoms (World Health Organization (WHO), 2001; Kessler et
al. 2003; Hardeveld et al. 2010; American Psychiatric Association (APA), 2000). Structured
interviews and questionnaires, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS;
Hamilton, 1960) and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI; Beck, 1961; BDI-II; Beck et al,
1996a) are important and commonly used tools to screen for, study, and follow the course of
MDD (Beck et al. 1996b). In longitudinal studies, a total score, which results from simply
adding all symptom scores, 1s often used as a measure of changes in depression severity.
Relatively few studies use a more fine-grained analysis, in which the reduction of depression
severity is studied by examining specific (clusters of) symptoms of depression instead of

using the total score (e.g., Bhar et al. 2008; Fournier et al. 2013; Stewart & Harkness 2012).

What all the above studies have in common is that they are based on the latent variable model.
According to this model, symptoms of a given disorder are assumed to share an essential
property; namely, their causal dependence on a latent variable, from which all symptoms arise
(Borsboom et al. 2008; Kendler et al. 2011). In this perspective, symptoms experienced by
patients are merely effects of the relevant latent variable (in this case depression). Standard
models assume the symptoms to be statistically independent given the latent variable, and as a
result, symptom associations are viewed to be spurious (Borsboom, 2008). Specifically, in the
standard model, symptoms are not considered to have autonomous influence on one another.
The latent variable approach, as utilized in standard models, is therefore not suitable to
examine the dynamic relations between symptoms. The recently developed network approach
(Cramer et al. 2010) steps away from this latent variable model by proposing that research
should no longer focus exclusively on the mean level of symptoms or change therein (e.g., an
overall score or a reduction of symptoms). Instead, this approach emphasizes that clinical
research should also focus on the relation between individual symptoms from one time point

to another, which we denote here as short-term dynamics’.

The importance of examining these short-term dynamics is supported by various sources.

First, theories of treatments for depression tend to focus on the short-term symptom dynamics

' Note that short-term dynamics refers to the dynamics between time points that are close to one another (e.g.
time point t-1 and t). This in contrast to looking at changes in average values (mean levels), which can also be
seen as a long-term dynamics. However, we do not use the latter term, since the term “change in mean level” is
more intuitive.
 when describing their proposed mechanisms of change. For example, according to Beck’s
(1979) cognitive theory, change in cognitive processes (e.g. negative thinking) leads to
changes in symptoms such as affect (Beck, 1964; Rush et al. 1981). Second, in clinical
practice it is commonly observed that if patients experience relief in one symptom (for
example sleeping problems), other symptoms start to wane as well, indicating the start of
recovery; this is especially notable when symptoms are systematically assessed at the start of
each therapy session, as is the case in cognitive therapy (Beck et al. 1979). Third, recent
studies indicate that depression risk factors and stressful life events have differential effects
on depressive symptoms (Cramer et al. 2012; Fried et a/. 2013). As Cramer et al. (2012)
showed, correlations between symptoms were directly influenced by the stressful life events
and could not be explained by changes in an underlying common cause, in this case the risk to
develop depression. This further supports the idea that symptoms have an autonomous
influence on one another. Being able to objectively describe such symptom-by-symptom

interactions can give important clues for clinical research and practice.

Apart from their substantive plausibility, network approaches open up a new range of research
questions. For example, estimating a network of symptoms from depression questionnaires
allows for an objective assessment of the centrality of symptoms (Opsahl et al. 2010;
Boccaletti et al. 2006). Symptoms with a central position in the network are probably the most
important or influential ones and are therefore likely to cause the symptom spread to continue.
Studying these central symptoms can give clues for further clinical research. One could
investigate, for instance, the commonly held assumption that anhedonia (loss of pleasure and
interest) and depressed mood are central symptoms of depression as stated by the most
prevalent diagnostic systems DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10, (WHO, 2008). In
addition, once the network has been estimated, the community structure of the network can be
examined (Girvan & Newman, 2002). A community 1s present if some clusters of symptoms
are more strongly interconnected with each other than with symptoms that are not part of the

cluster. In this way, the dynamic architecture of depression can be investigated.

This paper will be the first to investigate the short-term dynamics of one of the most widely
used psychological questionnaire for depression: the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II).
Inspired by the possibilities of the network approach, we will apply a novel method developed
by Bringmann et al. (2013) that 1s able to explore these symptom dynamics, and infer a
network structure of the BDI-II symptoms. Until recently, 1t was not possible to infer these

kinds of directed and weighted networks from clinical questionnaires since two important
 requirements for studying short-term dynamics, intensive longitudinal data in which a set of
symptoms is measured frequently across time, and a suitable statistical method, were lacking.
Intensive longitudinal data 1s still sparse, but in a recent study of Lemmens et al. (2011;
submitted) such data for the BDI-II were collected. Second, the newly developed vector
autoregressive (VAR) multilevel method, which is a combination of multilevel (hierarchical)
and time series models, 1s suited for analyzing these kinds of clinical longitudinal data. These
data have rather short time series (ca. 20 time points) for a large sample of patients
(Bringmann et al. 2013). Note that since only few studies have investigated single specific
(clusters of) symptoms of the BDI-II or even interactions between symptoms in general, all

analyses are exploratory.

The structure of the paper is as follows: First, we will infer the network(s) representing the
short-term dynamics of the BDI-IJ symptoms. Second, we will study the centrality of
symptoms. Based on the DSM-IV and ICD-10, one would expect the BDI-II items that are
intuitively most closely related to the main symptoms, anhedonia and depressed mood
(namely items: “loss of interest’, “loss of pleasure” and “‘sadness’’), to be the most central
ones in the network(s). In the third and last part, we will analyze whether communities are
present in the BDI-II network(s). Since the network(s) consists of a fair number of symptoms

(1.e., 21), we expect the emergence of new clusters of symptoms or community structures.

Method
Data

The data in the current study come from a large randomized clinical trial (RCT), which
examined the effectiveness, relapse prevention and mechanisms of change of Cognitive
therapy (CT) vs. Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) for depression (Lemmens ef a/. 2011,
submitted). In this study, 182 patients (age between 18 and 65) with a DSM-IV diagnosis of
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) were randomly allocated to one of three conditions: (a)
CT (n = 76), (b) IPT (1 = 75), or (c) an 8-week waiting-list control (WLC) condition followed
by treatment of choice (CT or IPT; m =31). In the current study, we did not differentiate
between patients who started therapy immediately and who started after 8 weeks. This
resulted in a sample size of 99 for the CT condition (mean age of 40 years and SD=12; 80%
female) and a sample size of 83 for the IPT condition (mean age of 41 years and SD=12; 64%
 female). There were no significant differences in demographic and clinical characteristics
between the groups. Each patient participated in 3 to 20 weekly individual sessions,
depending on the progress of the patient or due to drop out. On average, patients completed
14 sessions (SD=5).” The BDI-II was administered before each session to assess depression
severity. Of the 2661 sessions, 2.5% of the BDI-II data were missing. Further details
concerning the design of the trial and effectiveness of the interventions have been fully

reported elsewhere (Lemmens ef a/. 2011; Lemmens et al. submitted).

Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-I])

The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II; Beck et a/. 1996a; Dutch translation by van der
Does, 2002) is one of the most widely used and empirically validated questionnaires for
screening depression. The BDI-II is a self-report questionnaire measuring the severity of
depression with 21 items. Each item 1s rated on a 4 point Likert-scale ranging from 0 to 3. The
total score, ranging from 0 to 63, is constructed by adding the item scores, with higher scores

reflecting more severe depressive symptomatology.

Interventions

CT and IPT are two of the most empirically validated psychotherapies used for treating
depression (Cuijpers et al. 2008, 2011; Hollon et al. 2002). CT is based on Beck’s (1979)
cognitive theory, which states that depression results from maladaptive information-
processing strategies that are maintained by dysfunctional behavioral responses. CT focuses
on identifying and changing dysfunctional cognitions, schemas and attitudes in order to treat
depression. In IPT, the interpersonal model of depression is central (Klerman et al. 1984).
According to this model, major disturbances in the interpersonal domain may cause and
maintain depression. It is assumed that depressive symptoms can be reduced through the

improvement of interpersonal functioning.

“Analyses indicated that there were no differences in demographic and clinical characteristics between subjects
that dropped out and those who finished therapy (at least 12 sessions).
 Statistical analysis

The BDI-II network

First, we inferred the BDI-II network by analyzing the short-term dynamics between the 21
symptoms across the 20 weeks of therapy with a modified version of the multilevel- Vector
Autoregressive (VAR) method (Bringmann ef al. 2013)°. In the multilevel-VAR method, the
time dynamics between the 21 symptoms of the BDI-II from one moment to the other are
represented by a VAR model (see also Tschacher et al. 2012 for a similar approach). In the
VAR model, the dependent variable (e.g., symptom “sadness”; item 1) at time point ¢ (e.g.,
session 2) is regressed on the lagged f-1 (e.g., session 1) versions of the independent variables
(Box & Jenkins, 1976; Walls & Schafer, 2006)". The independent variables in this study are
all the symptoms of the BDI-II, measured at the previous time point (in this case the previous
session). To account for differences between patients, all regression coefficients were
assumed to be normally distributed at the population level. As a consequence, we obtained a
multilevel model consisting of fixed (average) and random (individual) effects’. Each BDI-II
symptom was used as a criterion variable once, which means that 21 multilevel-VAR models

were estimated.

In order to estimate a multilevel-VAR model, data need to be stationary. An implication of
this assumption is that that the variables will fluctuate around the same mean over time
(Lutkepohl, 2005). Since the BDI-II symptoms decreased over the course of treatment
(Lemmens et al. submitted), the means changed significantly, which indicates a non-
stationary process. For this reason, a linear trend in the multilevel-VAR model was included,
making the data trend stationary (Hamaker & Dolan, 2009). This implies that the short-term

dynamics or the session-to-session fluctuations of the symptoms (as represented by the

* Note that we deviate in this paper slightly from the procedure as proposed by Bringmann et al. (2013). With 21
items, it is not computationally possible to include all 21 random effects in the multilevel-VAR model
simultaneously. Instead, we included only 5 random effects (including the autoregressive coefficient and the
intercept) at the same time in a stepwise matter. Simulations indicated that the fixed effects could still be
estimated precisely with this number of subjects and time points, which means that this is a feasible approach for
estimating the current average network.

* Theoretically further lags are also possible. For example, a lag 2 model would indicate how symptoms are
related to all symptoms experienced two sessions and one session ago. However, model comparison indicated
that lag 1 was a more likely model than a lag 2 model (BIC lag 1: 71162, BIC lag 2: 71539).

> Simulations (not reported here) have indicated that because it is computationally not possible to include all 21
random effects at once in the multilevel-VAR model, the variance components (random effects variances) cannot
be estimated accurately enough. For this reason, they will not be discussed further in the paper. The random
effects should not be left out of the model though, because their inclusion leads to a more precise estimate of the
fixed effects.
 network) and the decrease of symptoms across the sessions (as represented by the linear
trend) are modeled separately. Therefore, change in the short-term dynamics is in principle
unrelated to change in the mean level of the BDI-II symptoms. Note further that stationarity
also implies the assumption that the effects of symptoms on other symptoms are stable across

time.

In order to obtain the BDI-II network, the estimated fixed effects of the multilevel- VAR
analyses were used (Snijders & Bosker, 2012). Fixed effects represent the average connection
strengths of the arrows in the network among the 21 symptoms and indicate whether the
symptoms are positively or negatively related to each other. The fixed effects represent either
autoregressive effects (self-loops) or cross-regressive effects (connections between different
variables) in the network. Note that the network only represents the dynamic relations
between the symptoms (the slopes of the multilevel-VAR model) and not the mean scores (the

intercepts of the multilevel-VAR model) of the symptoms.

The estimated fixed effects or connections of the network resulted in a directed weighted
network structure of the BDI-II, which was visualized using qgraph (Epskamp et a/. 2012), a
package for the statistical programming language R. Arrows or connections in the network
represent more than mere associations between symptoms: because symptoms are measured
over time, the connections can be viewed as an approximation of causality, resembling
Granger-causality (Granger, 1969; Tschacher et al. 2012). The network analyses were based
on all the connections of the network. However, for reasons of clarity, we only visually
present the strongest connections in the inferred network; that is, those connections which
surpass the significance threshold (5%) using the False Discovery Rate (FDR) method
(Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995; Benjamini et a/. 2006). In the visually presented network,
symptoms that are more strongly related to each other tend to be closer together in the figure
(this 1s a result of the node placement algorithm; see Fruchterman & Reingold, 1991;

Epskamp et al. 2011).

Since the current study included two different therapy groups (CT and IPT), it 1s possible that
two different network structures give rise to the data. We tested this in two ways: First, we
fitted a model with the two networks separately and cross-correlated their estimated network

links. Secondly, we compared a model in which we included two networks with a model
 which had one common network; for this purpose, we used the Bayesian Information

Criterion (BIC; Schwarz, 1978). The model with the lowest BIC is the preferred model.°

Centrality analysis

In the second analysis, the inferred network was further analyzed by estimating the centrality
of the BDI-II symptoms. In a centrality analysis, one can determine the relative importance or
influence of a symptom in the network. We performed three types of centrality analyses:
outdegree, indegree and betweenness centrality (see Opsahl et al. 2010).’ Outdegree centrality
indicates how many outgoing arrows or how much information a symptom sends to other
symptoms it 1s directly connected to. In the same way, indegree centrality indicates how many
incoming arrows a symptom receives from the directly connected symptoms. Betweenness
centrality takes into account both the direct and indirect connections of a symptom. A
symptom with a high betweenness centrality is a symptom located on many paths between
other symptoms and thus is a symptom through which the information in the network has to
pass often. Therefore, a symptom with a high betweenness centrality is important in funneling

the information flow or the symptom spread in the network.

Community structure analysis

As a third analysis, we performed a community structure analysis. In complex networks, new
structures of clusters can often be found. An example of such a cluster is a community, in
which groups of symptoms are densely interconnected among each other, but sparsely
connected to the overall network. We used the Walktrap algorithm, which 1s suited for
weighted networks (Pons & Latapy, 2005). This algorithm does not take directions of the
arrows into account, so we summed the connection strengths (arrows) between two symptoms
to have an appropriate undirected network suitable for analysis. The Walktrap algorithm uses
random walks on the network to find communities or densely interconnected symptoms. The
algorithm reveals how many groups can be found and also to which group a symptom of the

network belongs to. All the analyses were done in the statistical software R.

° The BIC was calculated by taking the average of the BICs of the seperate univariate models.
’ Since we want to estimate the centrality between the symptoms, self-loops are not taken into account in the
centrality analyses. However, in all other analyses self-loops are taken into account.
 Results

The BDI-II network

Figure | shows the inferred network of the dynamics between the 21 BDI-II symptoms. The
analysis of cross-correlations and the model fitting approach using the BIC indicated that the
network structure did not differ across the two therapy groups (7 = 0.86, p<0.0001; one
network: BIC= 77367.65 versus two networks: BIC= 80574.09). Therefore, only one network
was needed, representing both treatment groups. From the figure, it 1s evident that the
strongest connections between symptoms are all positive in sign. Thus, when a symptom
score increases, it is likely that other symptom scores also increase the next session, leading to
an increase in the severity of symptoms in general. For example, if a participant reports
feelings of guilt (“guilty feelings”, item 5) 1n one session, that participant 1s more likely to
report feelings of failure about the past (“past failure”, item 3) the next session. The strength
of the relation between symptoms translates into the thickness of the arrows in the figure: the
stronger the symptoms are related the thicker the arrow between two symptoms, and the
closer the symptoms tend to be together in the figure. This is expressed in, for example, the

placement of the symptoms “past failure” (item 3) and “worthlessness” (item 14).

Apart from the connections between the symptoms, self-loops can contain important
information. For example, the self-loop of the symptom “loss of interest 1n sex” (item 21) is
clearly the strongest connection of the network, meaning that when a participant reports loss
of interest in sex one session, he or she 1s highly likely to report this in the next session as
well. Furthermore, self-sustaining loops are apparent in the network. For example,
““worthlessness” (item 14) and “guilty feelings” (item 5) seem to mutually influence each
other. It should be mentioned that there are negative connections in the complete network as
well. However, since these are rather weak, they did not pass the threshold for visualization in

Figure 1. Note, however, that all connections are taken into account in the further analyses.° ?

* We also confirmed that the connections in the network and thus the relationships between symptoms are not
driven by differential variability. Standardizing the data per patient and per symptom led to a network that was
highly similar to the original network; the correlation between parameters in the original and standardized
network was 0.99. As a result, the conclusions of this paper are robust with respect to standardization of the data
and are unlikely to reflect differential symptom variability.

” Proportional odds logistic regression (POLR), which is a regression model for ordinal response variables, also
showed highly similar results; the correlation between parameters in the original and POLR network was 0.96
and led to similar centrality and community cluster results.

10
 Item legend of the BDI-II

OCHONDARWN>

Sadness

Pessimism

Past Failure

Loss of Pleasure
Guilty Feelings
Punishment Feelings
Self-Dislike
Self-Criticalness
Suicidal Thoughts
Crying

Agitation

Loss of Interest
Indecisiveness
Worthlessness

Loss of Energy
Changes in Sleeping
Irritability

Changes in Appetite
Concentration Difficulty
Tiredness

Loss of Interest in Sex

C Trestees

a
o

Na
X[
CS

Figure 1. The BDI-II network. In this network, the connections between the 21 symptoms that

surpass the significance threshold are visualized. Because of multiple hypothesis testing, we

do not use the traditional 0.05 cutoff for p-values as the standard (which would inflate the

number of unimportant links to be visualized); instead, we control the False Discovery Rate or

FDR at 5% (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995; Benjamini & Hochberg, 2006). Here, the 75

connections that pass the FDR threshold are visualized.

11
 Centrality analysis

Figure 2 presents the results of the centrality analysis. The left panel of the figure indicates

that the symptom “loss of pleasure” (item 4) has one of the highest outdegrees, meaning that

when one reports loss of pleasure in one session, it is likely that one will also report an

increase in other symptoms in the next session. This 1s in contrast to, for instance, the

symptom “changes in sleeping patterns” (item 16), which 1s less likely to directly affect other

symptoms the next session.

The middle panel indicates that the symptoms “indecisiveness” (item 13), “loss of interest”
(item 12), “past failure” (item 3) and “sadness” (item 1) feature higher indegrees and thus
receive a lot of information from other symptoms. This is 1n contrast to “suicidal thoughts”
(item 9): this symptom is unlikely to be influenced by other symptoms, and is more likely to

influence other symptoms (see also the first panel again).

The right panel indicates that the symptoms “loss of pleasure’ (item 4) and “past failure”’
(item 3) feature the highest betweenness centralities, but they also have one of the highest
outdegree (“loss of pleasure’’) and indegree (“past failure’) centrality scores, respectively.
Thus, the symptoms “‘loss of pleasure” and “past failure” are important in funneling the

activation flow or symptom spread in the network.

12
 9Suicid
4Pleas
14Worth
19Conce
15Energ
3Fail
17Irrit
7Disl
5Guil
20Fatig
21Sex
11Agitat
2Pess
6Punis
13lndec
12Intres
8Critic
1Sad
10Cryin
18Eat
16Sleep

| I | |
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Centrality index (Outdegree)

13lndec
12Intres
3Fail
1Sad
8Critic
14Worth
5Guil
4Pleas
7Disl
18Eat
17Irrit
20Fatig
2Pess
19Conce
10Cryin
15Energ
11Agitat
16Sleep
21Sex
6Punis
9Suicid

| | |
04 05 06 £07
Centrality index (Indegree)

4Pleas
3Fail
15Energ
19Conce
17Irrit
14Worth
5Guil
11Agitat
7Disl
20Fatig
6Punis
18Eat
12Intres
8Critic
9Suicid
16Sleep
13lndec
1Sad
10Cryin
2Pess

21Sex

Centrality index (Betweenness)

Figure 2. Outdegree, Indegree and Betweenness centrality for all BDI-I] symptoms. The

black dots are the model-based estimates of outdegree, indegree, and betweenness centrality.

The higher the centrality index score the more central the symptom 1s in the network.

Community structure of the BDI-II network

The community structure analysis using the Walktrap algorithm indicated a two-cluster

solution (see Figure 3)'”. This community structure means that symptoms in one cluster are

more densely interconnected among themselves and more sparsely connected to symptoms in

another cluster. The green cluster in Figure 3 consists of the symptoms “guilty feelings” (item

5), “past failure” (item 3), “self-dislike”’ (item 7), “‘self-criticalness” (item 8), “worthlessness”’

(item 14), “punishment feelings” (item 6) and “pessimism” (item 2), which are often

'® A hierarchical cluster analysis on the sum of the weighted links gave highly similar results.

13
 described as cognitive symptoms. Items in the yellow cluster mainly consist of physical and

affective symptoms of depression that appear related to loss of energy and pleasure.

Figure 3. Community structure of the BDI-II network with the two clusters indicated in two

different colours.

14
 Discussion

In this paper, we derived for the first time a network that represents the session-to-session
dynamics of one of the most widely used and empirically validated self-report measures for
assessing the severity of depression: the BDI-II (Beck et al. 1996a). Results indicate that, in
this network, all BDI-II symptoms are directly or indirectly connected. In addition, the
strongest connections between the symptoms are uniformly positive, indicating that, in
general, when a symptom changes in severity, other symptoms tend to change in the same
direction. This pattern of symptom dynamics 1s independent of the overall decrease in
symptom scores as this trend was modeled separately; hence, the pattern does not reflect the
common influence of treatment or recovery. In addition, for each symptom-symptom relation,
we controlled for the effect of all other symptoms in the network. Thus, the evidence from
this study points to the conclusion that direct effects among symptoms of the BDI-II are
prevalent, and in fact connect all symptoms assessed in the questionnaire. In other words,

symptoms of depression form a network of direct interactions.

Centrality analyses of the symptoms suggested that some symptoms are likely to have a larger
influence on the symptom spread than other symptoms. As one may expect based on, e.g., the
DSM-IV, the symptom “loss of pleasure” (item 4) is one of the most central items in the
symptom network and thus has a relatively large effect on the enduring of depressive
symptoms in general. Somewhat more surprisingly, the symptoms “sadness” (item 1) and
“loss of interest” (item 12) have a high indegree centrality, but quite a low outdegree and
betweenness centrality, which means that they tend to increase in severity as other symptoms
become more severe, but do not play a large role in funneling the symptom spread
themselves. Thus, these symptoms may serve a mainly reactive role in the short-term
dynamics of depression. Additional studies are needed to confirm these results, preferably
engaging different depression questionnaires, such as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale

(HDRS).

Based on theory, one may expect a difference in symptom dynamics for subjects receiving CT
and IPT because both treatments are assumed to work through different mechanisms. We did
not observe such differences. A potential explanation for our findings could be that the
dynamics between symptoms are similar when the treatments that are being compared are
equally effective in reducing pathology, a fact that has been well established for CT and IPT
for depression (Cuijpers et al. 2008; Hollon & Poniah, 2010). Alternatively, it might be the

15
 case that differences between CT and IPT actually do exist, but that we did not capture them
in the current study because the BDI-II is, due to its design, insensitive for the differences
between the two treatments. For example, even though the BDI-II includes items on several
cognitive components (key elements of CT), items referring to problems in the interpersonal
domain (core of IPT) are lacking. Further research involving other questionnaires is necessary
to indicate if there are differences in symptom dynamics between therapies. A final possibility
is that the difference between CT and IPT does not lie in symptom-symptom interaction, as
studied in this paper, but in differences that arise in, e.g., stepwise changes in
symptomatology. In this case, therapy effects might be detected in the way symptoms
decrease or increase from one time point to another. Models that may be used to analyze such
differences, while accounting for the network of symptom-symptom interaction, are currently
unavailable; however, non-linear statistical network inference techniques that may be used to
model such processes are within reach, and could be used to investigate this issue 1n the

future.

In the present study, community analyses revealed two groups of symptoms. The result
appears to accommodate emerging evidence from the biomedical literature, which points to
two types of depression: melancholia and atypical depression (Lamers et al. 2010; Lamers et
al. 2011). The current community clusters resemble these different depression types, as the
green cluster in Figure 3 has similarities to melancholic type, whereas the yellow cluster
resembles atypical depression. It 1s also interesting to note that the community structure result,
based on multiple time points, 1s similar to the two-factor solution of the BDI-II, based on
pooling across subjects at one time point (as found in e.g. Beck et al. 1996a; see also Arnau et
al. 2001; Steer et al. 1999). Except for “suicidal thoughts”, all other symptoms in the green
cluster of Figure 3 are the same as in the cognitive dimension of the two-factor solution of the
BDI-II, whereas the yellow cluster could be interpreted as the somatic-affective or non-
cognitive dimension. Although it is a good sign that the results we find are consistent with
what one typically finds using factor analysis, our approach leads to a different way of
thinking, different strategies for intervention, and to very different conclusions. In the latent
variable approach, there are just two clusters of symptoms, which 1s a static result. In the
network view, the result concerns the communication between symptoms that is denser within
the cluster than with symptoms that are not in the cluster, leading to new hypotheses on how
interventions should be operationalized, namely focusing on the interaction between

symptoms. Thus, the existence of such patterns of influence is not a replication of the results

16
 of factor analysis on individual differences; rather, 1t may be seen as a potential explanation

for these results (Wichers et al. 2014).

Several findings of this paper suggest further research. One important issue 1s how our results,
which only involved participants with a diagnosis of depression, compare to results from
unaffected individuals. For example, it is important to investigate whether a similar network
characterizes healthy individuals. One hypothesis would be that there are no distinct symptom
clusters in healthy subjects, but that instead all symptoms are similarly (and weakly)
connected. Such a network would be more resilient, since activation would not spread as
easily, and it would be less likely to “get stuck’ in a cluster of symptoms. Another important
topic for future research involves the difficult question of how to relate different time scales
(Boker et al. 2010). This is because the symptoms that characterize depression are likely to
influence each other in different time windows. For example, sleep problems are likely to
exert effects in a pattern of a day-to-day variation, whereas mood states are much quicker and
may affect each other within minutes. The question of how the dynamics of these different
time scales interact with each other is, in our view, one of the main puzzles to be solved in the

study of symptom dynamics.

Regarding clinical practice, the relevance of the methodology and results of our approach may
lie in opportunities to determine symptom centrality. For example, network analyses may be
used to indicate which symptoms should be targeted first, and in this sense may help in setting
up treatment strategies. Ideally, such analyses should be based on person-specific analyses (cf.
Molenaar & Campbell, 2009). Unfortunately, at the moment such analyses are not
computationally feasible for large networks of 21 symptoms. However, future development of
the multilevel-VAR method, combined with a higher frequency of within subject assessment,
should make it possible to take this procedure a step further, which may eventually lead to
person-specific therapeutic interventions. Information about person-specific network
centrality would not necessarily require pre-treatment assessment, and the high frequency
assessment could be informative at any point, even if started during therapy. For example, if
a centrality analysis of an individual network reveals that for that specific person “loss of
pleasure” is the most central symptom, therapy that intervenes on this symptom would be
more effective than treatment that intervenes on non-central symptoms; for other persons,
different interventions may be preferable. In a similar vein, one could hypothesize that if

“suicidal thoughts” 1s the most central symptom for a given person, this may signal acute need

17
 for care. Furthermore, since “suicidal thoughts” has a high outdegree, and is thus likely to
trigger other symptoms, but a low indegree, and is thus not likely to be influenced by the other
symptoms, interventions should be directly targeted at this symptom. Given the increased
opportunities for assessing highly intensive time series within individuals, person-specific
treatment protocols based on networks of symptom dynamics are rapidly becoming a realistic
possibility. Thus, the network perspective is a promising new research field, which can give

guidance to research on depression and to psychological research in general.

18
 Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Markus Eronen, Verena Schmittmann and Madeline Pe for valuable input
and comments on the manuscript. Furthermore, we would also like to thank the three

anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.

19
 References:

Arnold BC, Strauss D (1991). Pseudolikelihood estimation: some examples. Sankhya: The
Indian Journal of Statistics, Series B 53, 233-243.

American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental

disorders (Ath ed., Text Revision). Author: Washington, DC.

Arnau, RC, Meagher MW, Norris MP, Bramson R (2001). Psychometric evaluation of the
Beck Depression Inventory-II with primary care medical patients. Health Psychology 20, 112-
119.

Beck AT, Ward CH, Mendelson M, Mock J, Erbaugh J (1961). An inventory for
measuring depression. Archives of general psychiatry 4, 561-71

Beck AT (1964). Thinking and depression: II. Theory and therapy. Archives of General
Psychiatry 10, 561-571.

Beck AT, Steer RA (1993). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory. Psychological
Corporation: San Antonio, TX.

Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK (1996a) Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd ed.
Psychological Corporation: San Antonio, TX.

Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri W (1996b). Comparison of Beck Depression
Inventories -[A and -II in psychiatric outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment 67, 588—

97.

Beck AT, Rush AJ, Shaw BF, Emery G (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. Guilford:
New York.

Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical
and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
Methodological 57, 289-300.

20
 Benjamini Y, Krieger AM, Yekutieli D (2006). Adaptive linear step-up procedures that
control the false discovery rate. Biometrika 93, 3, 491-507.

Bhar SS, Gelfand LA, Schmid SP, Gallop R, DeRubeis RJ, Hollon SD, Amsterdam JD,
Shelton RC, Beck AT (2008). Sequence of improvement in depressive symptoms across
cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy. Journal of Affective Disorders 110,161-166.

Boccaletti S, Latora V, Moreno Y, Chavez M, Hwang D-U (2006). Complex networks:
structure and dynamics. Physics Reports 424, 175-308.

Boker SM, Molenaar P, Nesselroade JR (2009). Issues in intraindividual variability:
individual differences in equilibria and dynamics over multiple time scales. Psychology and

aging 24, 858-862.

Borsboom D (2008). Psychometric perspectives on diagnostic systems. Journal of
Clinical Psychology 64, 1089-1108.

Box JEP, Jenkins GM, Reinsel GC (1994) Time series analysis: Forecasting and
control. Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Boyd JH, Weissman MM, Thompson WD, Myers JK (1982). Screening for depression in a
community sample: Understanding the discrepancies between depression symptom and

diagnostic scales. Archives of General Psychiatry 39, 1195-1200.

Bringmann LF, Vissers N, Wichers M, Geschwind N, Kuppens P, Peeters F, Borsboom
D, Tuerlinckx F (2013). A network approach to psychopathology: New insights into clinical
longitudinal data. PloS One 8, e60188.

Cramer AOJ, Waldorp LJ, van der Maas HLJ, Borsboom D (2010). Comorbidity: a
network perspective. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33, 137-193.

Cramer AOJ, Borsboom D, Aggen SH, Kendler KS (2012). The pathoplasticity of
dysphoric episodes: differential impact of stressful life events on the patterns of depressive

symptom inter-correlations. Psychological Medicine 42, 957-965.

Cuijpers P, van Straten A, Andersson G, van Oppen P (2008). Psychotherapy for
depression in adults: a meta-analysis of comparative outcome studies. Journal of consulting

and clinical psychology 76, 909-922.

21
 Epskamp S, Cramer AOJ, Waldorp LJ, Schmittmann VD, Borsboom D (2011). Qgraph:
network representations of relationships in data. R package version 0.4.10 (http://

CRAN.R-project.org/package=qgraph).

Fieuws S, Verbeke G (2006). Pairwise fitting of mixed models for the joint

modeling of multivariate longitudinal profiles. Biometrics 62, 424-431

Fournier JC, DeRubeis RJ, Hollon SD, Gallop R, Shelton RC, Amsterdam JD (2013).
Differential Change in Specific Depressive Symptoms during Antidepressant Medication or

Cognitive Therapy. Behaviour research and therapy 51, 392-398

Fried EI, Nesse RM, Zivin K, Guille C, Sen S (2013). Depression is more than the sum
score of its parts: individual DSM symptoms have different risk factors. Psychological

medicine DOI: 10.1017/S0033291713002900.

Fruchterman, TMJ, Reingold, EM (1991). Graph drawing by force-directed
placement. Software - Practice & Experience 21, 1129-1164.

Girvan M, Newman M (2002). Community structure in social and biological networks.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99, 7821—7826.

Granger CWJ (1969). Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-

spectral methods. Econometrica 37, 424-438.

Hamaker EL, Dolan CV (2009). Idiographic Data Analysis: Quantitative Methods—From
Simple to Advanced. In Dynamic Process Methodology in the Social and Developmental
Sciences (pp. 191-216). Springer: New York.

Hamilton M (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
Psychiatry 23, 56-62.

22
 Hardeveld F, Spijker J, De Graaf R, Nolen WA, Beekman ATF (2010). Prevalence and
predictors of recurrence of major depressive disorder in the adult population. Acta

Psychiatrica Scandinavica 122, 184-191.

Hollon SD, Thase ME, Markowitz JC (2002). Treatment and prevention of depression.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 3, 39-77.

Hollon SD, Ponniah K (2010). A review of empirically supported psychological therapies for
mood disorders in adults. Depression and anxiety 27, 891-932.

Keller MB, Lavori PW, Mueller TI, Endicott J, Coryell W, Hirschfeld R, Shea T (1992).
Time to recovery, chronicity, and levels of psychopathology in major depression: a 5-year

prospective follow-up of 431 subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry 49, 809-816.

Kendler KS, Zachar P, Craver C (2011). What kinds of things are psychiatric disorders?
Psychological Medicine 41, 1143-1150

Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Koretz D, Merikangas KR, Rush AJ,
Walters EE, Wang PS (2003). The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Journal of the American Medical
Association 289, 3095-3105.

Klerman GL, Weissman MM, Rounsaville BJ, Chevron ES (1984). /nterpersonal
psychotherapy for depression. Basic Books: New York.

Lamers F, de Jonge P, Nolen WA, Smit JH, Zitman FG, Beekman AT, Penninx BW
(2010). Identifying depressive subtypes in a large cohort study: results from the Netherlands
Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). The Journal of clinical psychiatry 71, 1582-
1589.

Lamers F, Rhebergen D, Merikangas KR, de Jonge P, Beekman ATF, Penninx BWJH
(2012). Stability and transitions of depressive subtypes over a 2-year follow-up.
Psychological Medicine 17, 1-11.

23
 Lemmens LH, Arntz A, Peeters FP, Hollon SD, Roefs A, Huibers MJ (2011).
Effectiveness, relapse prevention and mechanisms of change of cognitive therapy vs.

interpersonal therapy for depression: Study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials

12, 150.

Lemmens LH, Arntz A, Peeters FP, Hollon SD, Roefs A, Huibers MJ (submitted).
Clinical Effectiveness of Cognitive Therapy vs. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depression:

Results of a Randomised Controlled Trial

Lutkepohl H (2005). New introduction to multiple time series analysis. Springer: Berlin.

Molenaar PC, Campbell CG (2009). The new person-specific paradigm in psychology.

Current Directions in Psychological Science 18, 112-117.

Opsahl T, Agneessens F, Skvoretz F (2010). Node centrality in weighted
networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths. Social Networks 32, 245-251.

Pons P, Latapy M (2005). Computing communities in large networks using random walks.

In Computer and Information Sciences-ISCIS , pp. 284-293 .Springer: Berlin.

Rush AJ, Kovacs M, Beck AT, Weissenburger J, Hollon SD (1981). Differential effects of
cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy on depressive symptoms. Journal of Affective

Disorders 3, 221-229.

Schwarz G (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics 6, 461-464.

Shelton RC, Beck AT (2008). Sequence of improvement in depressive symptoms across

cognitive therapy and pharmacotherapy. Journal of Affective Disorders 110, 161-166.

Shumway RS, Stoffer DS (2006) Time series analysis and its applications: With
R examples. New York: Springer.

Snijders T, Bosker R (2012). Multilevel analysis: An introduction to basic and

24
 advanced multilevel modeling. Sage Publications: London.

Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri WF, Beck AT (1999). Dimensions of the Beck depression
inventory-II in clinically depressed outpatients. Journal of clinical psychology 55, 117-128.

Stewart JG, Harkness KL (2012). Symptom specificity in the acute treatment of
major depressive disorder: a re-analysis of the treatment of depression collaborative research

program. Journal of Affective Disorders 137, 87-97.

Tschacher W, Zorn P, Ramseyer F (2012). Change Mechanisms of Schema-Centered
Group Psychotherapy with Personality Disorder Patients. PLoS ONE 7, e39687.

Van der Does AJW (2002). Manual of the Dutch Version of the Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI-II-NL). Harcourt Publishers: Amsterdam.

Walls TA, Schafer JL (2006) Models for Intensive Longitudinal Data.
Oxford University Press: Oxford.

Wichers M (2014). The dynamic nature of depression: a new micro-level perspective of

mental disorder that meets current challenges. Psychological medicine 44, 1349-1360.

World Health Organization (2001). The world health report. Mental health: new

understanding, new hope. World Health Organization: Geneva.

World Health Organization (2008). /CD-10: International statistical classification of
diseases and related health problems (10th Rev. ed.). Author: New York, NY.

25
 26
