® Check for updates

WILEY

Received: 10 August 2018
DOI: 10.1002/eat.22952

Revised: 16 August 2018 Accepted: 17 August 2018

EATING DISORDERS
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Longitudinal and personalized networks of eating disorder
cognitions and behaviors: Targets for precision intervention a
proof of concept study

Cheri A. Levinson PhD ® | Irina Vanzhula MS | Leigh C. Brosof BA

Department of Psychological and Brain

Sciences, University of Louisville, Louisville, Abstract
Kentucky Introduction: Despite the high mortality and significant societal and personal costs associated
Correspondence with eating disorders (EDs) there are few evidence-based treatments. Part of the difficulty

Dr. Levinson, Department of Psychological and
Brain Sciences, University of Louisville, Life
Sciences Building, Louisville, KY 40292.

Email: cheri.levinson@louisville.edu

developing and implementing evidence-based treatments in EDs is due to the extremely high
heterogeneity (e.g., variability in treatment outcome, symptom presentation etc) present.
Methods: To begin to identify specific symptom heterogeneity within persons, the current study

Funding information used novel within and between group and intra-individual network analyses to create longitudi-

National Institute of Mental Health, Grant/
Award Number: 5T32DA007261-17

nal and within-person networks of ED cognitions and behaviors (N = 66 individuals diagnosed
with an ED). This article provides a proof of concept study for how to use between and within-
person network analyses both for the EDs and other forms of psychopathology.

Results: We found that cognitions focused on desiring thinness played a likely maintaining role
in ED pathology, across network type and across time. Furthermore, we showed that three indi-
viduals with the same diagnosis (anorexia nervosa) differed in which symptoms maintained the
disorder. We use these participants to exemplify how to use intra-individual network analysis to
personalize treatment focused on the primary maintaining symptoms. Finally, we found that
amount of time (e.g., 4 hr vs. simultaneously) impacts how symptoms maintain each other.
Conclusions: These findings have implications for the development of novel personalized
evidence-based treatments for EDs, as well as implications for how the field understands how
psychopathology maintains itself. These data represent a first-step towards using intra-
individual network analyses in the ED field, as well as for hypotheses generation in future

research.

KEYWORDS

anorexia nervosa, eating disorders, network analysis, personalized treatment

1 | INTRODUCTION

disorders characterized by overvaluation of weight and shape. This

overvaluation of weight and shape maintains ED pathology through

Eating disorders (EDs) are serious mental illnesses, with the highest
mortality rate of any psychiatric disorder (Klump, Bulik, Kaye, Trea-
sure, & Tyson, 2009). Despite high levels of mortality, societal cost,
and personal impairment, there are few empirically supported treat-
ments for EDs (Linardon, Fairburn, Fitzsimmons-Craft, Wilfley, &
Brennan, 2017). The most utilized and well-supported treatment for
adults with EDs is Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Eating Disorders
(CBT-E; Fairburn, 2008; Fairburn, Cooper, & Shafran, 2003). CBT-E is

based on theory that proposes that EDs are primarily cognitive

pathways between cognitive, behavioral, affective, and physiological
symptoms. CBT-E is proposed to work by disrupting pathways
between symptoms in these domains. For example, intervention on
fear of weight gain (cognition) might then disrupt connections
between fear of weight gain and excessive exercise, body checking,
and restriction (behaviors), thereby weakening the disorder. However,
CBT-E is ultimately only effective for approximately 50% of individ-
uals with eating disorders (Fairburn et al., 2015). More research is

needed to improve CBT-E to expand its effectiveness and to develop

Int J Eat Disord. 2018;51:1233-1243.

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/eat

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. | 1233
 1204 | Wy

LEVINSON ET AL.

ILEY EATING DISORDERS

novel evidence-based treatments (e.g., Danielsen, Rekkedal, Frostad, &
Kessler, 2016).

Part of the low response rates in CBT-E may be attributable to the
significant symptom and treatment response heterogeneity that is seen
in the EDs (Forbush et al., 2017), though it is possible this prior finding
is accounted for by treatments that only produce modest response
rates rather than heterogeneity per se. For example, other than age of
onset and duration of illness, there are no reliable indicators of treat-
ment outcomes (e.g., Murray, Loeb, & Le Grange, 2015). Some individ-
uals with EDs recover rapidly and permanently, and others fall into a
chronic illness course (Bardone-Cone et al., 2010). It is unclear why
some individuals recover, while others do not. It is also unclear how
cognitive-behavioral factors vary across individuals (e.g., Castellini,
Montanelli, Faravelli, & Ricca, 2014). This heterogeneity makes it diffi-
cult for clinicians to pinpoint which maintaining symptoms should be
targeted in treatment. In other words, personalized treatments that can
target the heterogeneous maintaining symptoms of EDs are needed.

There is recent emphasis on using precision medicine to identify
precise intervention targets, which should lead to more effective
treatments (Insel, 2014). In the anxiety and depression literature,
researchers are beginning to test data-driven techniques to personal-
ize and direct clinicians to the use of modular treatments (Fernandez,
Fisher, & Chi, 2017; Fisher, Reeves, Lawyer, Medaglia, & Rubel, 2017).
This approach has been shown to outperform clinician judgment and
shows how data-driven methods can be used to personalize treat-
ment. For example, the development of the Dynamic Assessment
Treatment Algorithm (please see Fernandez, Fisher & Chi, 2017 for
information on its development) showed that this algorithm was more
likely to adhere to data when determining which modules of the Uni-
fied Protocol to funnel patients into, whereas clinicians were more
likely to approach treatment in an additive manner (module 1, then
module 2 etc). These data fit with the substantial literature showing
that clinician-judgment is often flawed in comparison to actuarial or
data-based approaches (e.g., Dawes, Faust, & Meehl, 1989; Spengler
et al., 2009) and point to the importance of developing data-driven
approaches to personalize treatment.

To develop personalized interventions for EDs, we first need to
identify the unique maintaining symptoms across and within individ-
uals. Recent advances in network analysis allow for the creation of
personalized, intra-individual networks that show how symptoms of
disorders maintain themselves both between and within individuals
(Bringmann et al., 2013, 2016; Epskamp et al., 2017). Network analy-
sis is a methodology drawn from network theory and network science
that allows for an unprecedented number of interacting factors to be
considered at once within one statistical model (Borsboom & Cramer,
2013; Borsboom, 2017). Instead of identifying an underlying disease
(as in latent variable modeling), network theory conceptualizes symp-
toms themselves as causal maintaining mechanisms of psychiatric ill-
ness (Boschloo et al., 2015; Fried et al., 2016, 2017; Kendler,
Zachar, & Craver, 2011; McNally, 2016; Nelson et al., 2017). For
example, instead of assuming that depression is caused by an underly-
ing disease of ‘depression’, network theory assumes that symptoms of
depression interact and cause each other (e.g., lack of sleep leads to
fatigue, which then leads to low energy and then low mood), creating
depression (Borsboom et al., 2011; Borsboom, 2017; Fried et al., 2016).

Therefore, network analysis based on network theory allows for the
examination of how cognitive-behavioral symptoms interact and
become mutually reinforcing.

Until recently, cross-sectional network analyses have been used to
identify possible intervention targets for ED treatments, such as fear of
weight gain (Levinson et al., 2017; Debois et al., 2017) and body check-
ing (Forbush et al., 2016). However, cross-sectional models are limited
in that they cannot separate between-subjects relationships from short-
term within-subjects relationships (Hamaker, 2012). Intraindividual net-
work analysis moves beyond cross-sectional models that conceptualize
maintaining symptoms of EDs across individuals to show what symp-
toms maintain EDs within individuals. Temporal group-level models
(based on multiple observations in multiple individuals) allow for the
examination of both intra-individual dynamics, between-subjects over-
lap, and differences between within- and between-subjects networks.

Specifically, we can estimate (1) temporal, (2) contemporaneous,
and (3) between-subject networks, as well as (4) intraindividual net-
works within one person (Epskamp et al., 2016). Temporal models elu-
cidate the dynamics of psychopathology, showing how one symptom
may predict another at the next time point, which is essential in
understanding maintaining cycles of psychopathology. Contempora-
neous models show how the variables are related at the same time
point while accounting for temporal relationships. Because temporal
relationships may occur within seconds (e.g., affect impacting behavior
and vice versa), contemporaneous models may uncover relationships
that are missed in temporal networks (Epskamp et al., 2017). Finally,
between-subjects models (cross-sectional between-person models)
allow for the examination of between-mean relationships for all indi-
viduals under study (e.g., individuals who are more afraid to gain
weight are, on average, also more likely to think about dieting). Intra-
individual networks can be created for each individual that shows
how one person's symptoms maintain their eating disorders. By con-
structing each of these networks, it is possible to begin to identify
both between and within person the cognitive-behavioral symptoms
that maintain EDs. Researchers can then identify what contributes to
the high heterogeneity of cognitive-behavioral ED symptoms and
which unique symptoms might be future targets of investigation for
precision medicine interventions between and within individuals.

To create such models, we need intensive, longitudinal data
across time (e.g., Epskamp et al., 2017c; Fisher et al., 2017). Thus, in
the current pilot study, which can be considered an applied tutorial,
we used ecological momentary assessment data (N = 66) to collect
longitudinal data across 1 week (28 assessment points) on ED cogni-
tions and behaviors. We then used both between (or traditional,
cross-sectional between-person network analyses) and_ within
(e.g., intra-individual) network analyses to model networks of ED cog-
nitions and behaviors. We had three primary questions: First, what are
the cognitive-behavioral relationships between individuals across time
(e.g., temporal, contemporaneous, and between-subjects models); Sec-
ond, are within-individuals models heterogeneous, despite similar
diagnoses; Third, what are specific targets (e.g., symptoms) that might
be used to generate hypotheses for future novel personalized treat-
ment development research? We hypothesized that, (a) the between-
person model would replicate prior cross-sectional between-person

models showing that desire for thinness and fears of weight gain

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON €T AL.

International Journal of | 1235

would be the primary central symptoms; and (b) given the high level
of heterogeneity in ED symptom profiles, the intra-individual models
would vary across individuals regardless of the same_ primary

diagnosis.

2 | METHODS

2.1 | Participants

Participants were 66 individuals diagnosed with an ED. Participants
were primarily female (n = 64; 97.0%); European American (n = 56;
86.2%); and had an average age of 24.98 (SD = 7.31; Range = 14-41).
Other ethnicities reported were Asian (n = 3; 4.5%; Hispanic (n = 3;
4.5%); Black (n = 1; 1.5%) multiracial (n = 2; 3%) and one reported her

ethnicity as not listed.

2.1.1 | Diagnoses and clinical characteristics

We used the Eating Disorder Diagnostic Scale (Stice, Telch, & Rizvi,
2000; see measures below) to determine diagnoses from DSM-5,
which were made prior to beginning the ecological momentary assess-
ment (EMA) protocol: AN (n = 40; 60.6%), atypical AN (n = 14;
21.2%), BN (n = 6; 9.1%), low frequency BN (n = 1; 1.5%), and other
specified feeding and eating disorders (n = 3; 4.5%). The majority of
participants reported that they were currently in treatment for an ED
(n = 49; 74.2%), with an average of 2.5 hrs (SD = 4.53; Range = O to
30 hrs) of treatment per week. Median body mass index (BMI) was
20.66 (SD = 3.46; Range 13.89-32.28). Other self-reported current
diagnoses were Anxiety Disorder (n = 41; 62.1%); Depressive Disor-
der (n = 38; 57.6%); OCD (n = 13; 19.7%); and PTSD (n = 7; 10.6%).

2.2 | Diagnostic inventory

2.2.1 | Eating disorder diagnostic scale

The EDDS is a brief self-report measure used to diagnose EDs, such
as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder
(EDDS; Stice, Telch, & Rizvi, 2000). The EDDS has demonstrated ade-
quate internal consistency, as well as criterion and convergent validity
(Stice, Fisher, & Martinez, 2004).

2.3 | EMA measures

The EMA survey assessed 11 items that were classified as either ED
cognitions or ED behaviors. We drew items from the Eating Disorder
Inventory-2 (EDI-2; Garner, Olmstead, & Polivy, 1983), the Eating
Pathology Symptoms Inventory (EPSI; Forbush et al., 2013), and the
Eating Disorder Examination-Questionnaire (EDE-Q; Fairburn &
Beglin, 1994), because of their strong psychometric properties and as
has been used in prior EMA research (e.g., Mason et al., 2016). Four
items represented ED cognitions and were selected from the Eating
Disorder Inventory-2 (Garner, Omstead, & Polivy, 1983): | feel like |
have overeaten; | am thinking about dieting; | am preoccupied with the
desire to be thinner; | am terrified of gaining weight. Participants were
asked to rate how they felt “right now” and to rate each item on a
1 to 6 scale, where 1 = “not at all” and 6 = “extremely.” Seven items
described common ED behaviors drawn from the EDE-Q and EPSI:

WILEY EATING DISORDERS

Vomiting or other compensatory behaviors; Excessive exercise; Body-
checking; | have weighed myself; Binge-eating; Restriction. Participants
were asked to rate how much they engaged in these behaviors since
their last check in and to rate each item on a 1 to 6 scale, where

1 = “not at all” and 6 = “a lot.”

2.4 | Procedures

All procedures were approved by the Washington University Institu-
tional Review Board. Participants were recruited from an ED clinic
after discharge from either a residential or partial hospitalization treat-
ment program or from an ED alumni research registry. Participants
were invited to participate in a study of daily habits. All procedures
were completed either online or through a mobile application; partici-
pants living in any area of the country could participate. Participants
provided informed consent and then completed the EDDS online.
After completion of the online survey, participants were given instruc-
tions on how to download and access a mobile application measuring
daily habits (please see http://www.christophermetts.com/status-
post). This application notified participants four times a day for 1 week
and asked participants to report on their ED cognitions and behaviors.
Participants were compensated based on the number of times they
responded to the mobile application questionnaires and could receive

up to 25 dollars for participation.

2.5 | Data analytic procedure: Network analysis

Vector autoregressive (VAR) modeling was used for the analysis of
time-series data, both within an individual and on a group level
(Bringmann et al., 2013). These analyses are unique in that they statis-
tically identify the most important symptoms both between and
within individuals and across time. We used the multi-level vector
autoregressive (mIVAR) package, version 0.4 in R to estimate three
group-level networks: temporal, contemporaneous, and between-
subject (between-subjects is analogous to the cross-sectional analyses
that are generally presented in the network analyses field; Epskamp,
Deserno, & Bringmann, 2017b). For a more detailed description of
each model, see Epskamp et al. (2016). In all three networks, each
symptom (or variable) is represented as a node, and links between
nodes (i.e., edges) represent associations between symptoms. In a
temporal network, edges with an arrowhead pointing from one node
to another indicates that the first node predicts the other at the next
time point. For example, if fear of weight gain has an arrow leading to
thinking about dieting, then it indicates that fear of weight gain is pre-
dicting thinking about dieting at the next time point, while controlling
for the previous time point (e.g., auto-regressive model). In a contem-
poraneous network, the edge represents partial correlations between
variables, after controlling for all other variables in the same time
point and also variables of the previous time point. In the between-
subjects network, edges represent an average of two regression
parameters: how well the mean of one variable predicts the mean of
the other variable and vice versa. When the networks are plotted,
only significant edges are shown using the “or” rule (see Epskamp
et al., 2017 for more details).

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 1296 | \/

LEVINSON ET AL.

ILEY EATING DISORDERS

TABLE 1. Descriptive information for individual items in overall sample

Item Label Mean (SD) Range
| feel like | have overeaten Feelovereat 3.16 (1.89) 1-6
| am thinking about dieting Thinkdiet 3.75 (1.90) 1-6
| am preoccupied with the desire to be thinner Desirethin 4.10 (1.84) 1-6
| am terrified of gaining weight Feargain 4.47 (1.75) 1-6
Vomiting or other compensatory behaviors Vomit 1.31 (.97) 1-6
Excessive exercise Exercise 1.63 (1.29) 1-6
Body-checking Bodycheck 3.02 (1.87) 1-6
| have weighed myself Weighself 1.59 (1.45) 1-6
Binge eating Binge 1.28 (1.00) 1-6
Restriction Restrict 2.46 (1.71) 1-6

Next, we used the graphical VAR package in R to create intraindi-
vidual networks for three randomly selected individuals with AN (Wild
et al., 2010). We created both temporal and contemporaneous net-
works for each of these individuals. This method allows us to deter-
mine on an individual level the hypothesized maintaining cognitions
and behaviors.

The most central nodes were identified in all group-level net-
works (i.e., group-level temporal, contemporaneous, and between-
subject networks) and in the contemporaneous intraindividual net-
works. Three commonly used indices of centrality are betweenness,
closeness, and strength (McNally, 2016). For the group-level temporal
and contemporaneous networks, we used the strength centrality to
select the most central nodes because it is considered more stable
than betweenness and closeness (Epskamp, Borsboom, & Fried,
2017a). Strength centrality refers to the sum of the edge weights
between a focal node and all other nodes to which it is connected in
the network. A node with high strength centrality would be highly cor-
related with many other nodes in the network (Borsboom & Cramer,
2013; McNally, 2016). For the temporal group-level network,
inStrength and outStrength values were calculated. In inStrength cen-
trality refers to a sum of connections pointing towards the node and
indicates how many incoming arrows a symptom receives from the
directly connected symptoms. In words, high inStrength represents
that a symptom receives input from many other symptoms. Out-
Strength centrality refers to a sum of connections pointing from one
node to the other nodes in the network and indicates how much
information a symptom sends to other symptoms it is directly con-
nected to (Bringmann et al., 2015). In words, outStrength represents
that a symptom provides input to many other symptoms. For individ-
ual networks, centrality was calculated only for contemporaneous net-
works (Asparouhov, Hamaker and Muthén, 2018). The indices of
centrality were calculated using the centrality Plot and centrality
Table functions in q graph (Epskamp et al., 2012). Missing data were
estimated using the Kalman filter as part of the estimation procedure
(Haan-Rietdijk et al., 2017; Asparouhov, Hamaker, and Muther, 2018).

Furthermore, over all we had a 73% compliance rate for EMA data,

1Factors that contribute to power for these types of analyses are sample size,
number of time points, and number of symptoms (parameters) included in the
model (Schultzberg, M., & Muthén, B., 2018). With a sample size of 66 partici-
pants with 28 time points and 10 parameters we would achieve over .80 power
for a small to moderate effect.

which is as high or higher than most EMA studies in eating disorders.
Additionally, within our intra-individual networks calculated for the
three individuals with AN, these participants had greater than 84%

complete data.*

3 | RESULTS

3.1 | Compliance data

Average compliance was 73%. The average number of observations
missed is 7.28 (SD = 6.97) out of 28 observations. Median number of
observations missed is 5.00, range = O-26. For individual networks,
participant 1 did not miss any observations, participant 2 missed four

observations, and participant 3 had 10 missing observations.

3.2 | Descriptive statistics and zero-order
correlations

Average values and variance of individual items are reported in
Table 1 for the group network and in Table 2 for the individual net-
works. Table 3 shows zero-order correlations between averages of

each symptom assessed.

3.3 | Group level within-and between person
networks: Temporal, contemporaneous, and between-
subjects models (n > 1 networks)

Temporal, contemporaneous, and between-subject networks for the
total sample are shown in Figure 1. As seen in Figure 2, in the group-
level temporal network, the following nodes with the highest strength
centrality were identified: desire to be thin (inStrength = 1.45), body
checking (InStrength = 1.18), exercise (OutStrength = 1.82), and binge
eating (OutStrength = 1.33). In the contemporaneous network, the
following nodes with highest strength centrality were identified:
desire to be thin (Strength = 1.62), thinking about dieting
(Strength = 1.23), and fear of weight gain (Strength = 0.61). In the
between-subject network, the following nodes with highest strength
centrality were identified: desire to be thin (Strength = 2.13) and
restriction (Strength = 1.04).

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON €T AL.

International Journal of | 1237

WILEY EATING DISORDERS

TABLE 2 Descriptive information for individual items for each participant included in intra-individual network analyses

Item Label

| feel like | have overeaten Feelovereat

| am thinking about dieting Thinkdiet

| am preoccupied with the desire to be thinner Desirethin
| am terrified of gaining weight Feargain
Vomiting or other compensatory behaviors Vomit
Excessive exercise Exercise
Body-checking Bodycheck
| have weighed myself Weighself
Binge eating Binge
Restriction Restrict

TABLE3 Zero-order correlations among symptoms included in network models

1 2 3 4
1.Feelovereat -
2.Thinkdiet .64** -
3.Desirethin 8** SSE -
4.Feargain 3** 1 6** 145 -
5.Exercise .18** 24** 23** 19%
6.Binge 1** .22** 19%** 7 **
7.Bodycheck 3% 54 Oe 56**
8.Weighself 24** 2/7 ** 25% .26**
9.Restrict 2** 8** 0** o1**
10.Vomit 24** 25% 24** .22**

Mean (SD)
Participant 1 Participant 2 Participant 3
2.61 (1.54) 2.25 (2.09) 2.33 (.84)
3.86 (.71) 4.79 (1.76) 2.39 (.92)
4.82 (.72) 5.04 (1.63) 2.72 (.75)
5.14 (.52) 5.46 (1.21) 5.50 (.62)
O 1.96 (1.71) 1.11 (.32)
O 4.29 (2.22) 3.11 (.47)
2.93 (.86) 3.42 (2.04) 3.17 (.94)
O 2.79 (2.06) 4.44 (.86)
O 1.13 (.61) 1.17 (.38)
2.18 (.95) 5.50 (1.14) 2.22 (.55)

5 6 7 8 9 10

05 -

35** .28** -

48** 14** lt -

.16** .10** 13% 13** -

ots .30** 23% 7 ** 04 -

Note. **p < .001; feelovereat = feel like | have overeaten; thinkdiet = thinking about dieting; desirethin = preoccupied with the desire to be thinner; fear-
gain = terrified of gaining weight; exercise = excessive exercise; binge = binge eating; bodycheck = body checking; weighself = weighed myself; restrict =

restriction; vomit = vomiting or other compensatory behaviors.

3.4 | Intraindividual networks (n = 1 networks)

Temporal and contemporaneous networks for three randomly
selected individuals with anorexia nervosa are shown in Figure 3 (tem-
poral and contemporaneous). As seen in Figure 4, for participant
1, thinking about dieting (Strength = 1.90) was the most central symp-
tom; for participant 2, binge eating (Strength = 1.61) and exercise
(Strength = 0.78) were the most central symptoms; for participant
3, restricting (Strength = 1.67) and thinking about overeating

(Strength = 0.44) were the most central symptoms.

4 | DISCUSSION

We demonstrated how longitudinal between and within-person net-
work analysis can be used to identify relationships between ED cogni-
tions and behaviors both between and within individuals (at the group
level), as well as within one person. These methods hold extreme
promise for the development of precision medicine interventions for
EDs. For example, identification of which cognitions and behaviors
maintain EDs both between- and within-individuals provides a clearer
picture on the structure of ED psychopathology both at the group and
individual level of analysis, as well as across time. Identification of

likely maintaining symptoms within one person might lead to

interventions personalized to the individual by targeting their specific
maintaining symptoms. Theoretically, intervention on core, maintain-
ing symptoms should decrease all other symptoms within the network
(McNally et al., 2016), though we should note there has not yet been
empirical demonstration that intervention on core symptoms pro-
duces change, though central symptoms do predict ED treatment out-
comes (Olatunji, Levinson, and Calebs, 2018). Theoretically, we can
now identify possible maintaining symptoms not only across groups,
but also within the individual. It is also possible that intra-individual
network analysis might be used as one method to identify severe
symptoms that need to be targeted in treatment. Overall, this manu-
script shows how intra-individual network analyses could be used in
the ED field and the psychopathology field at large. However, we
should note that intraindividual network analysis is an extremely novel
methodology, and thus, results should be interpreted cautiously.
Future research should use these results for hypothesis generation for
future larger scale research. We await future research with larger sam-
ple sizes and additional assessment points to make any firm

conclusions.

4.1 | Overarching findings across model types

While the results here should still be considered tentative, there are

two primary hypotheses to be tested in future research that arise

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 1238 | WILEY LEVINSON er AL.
EATING DISORDERS
Temporal network Contemporaneous network Between-subjects network

FIGURE 1 Group-level temporal, contemporaneous, and between-subject networks. Note. Green nodes indicate cognitions and blue nodes indicate
behaviors. Green lines indicate positive relationship and red line indicate negative relationship between symptoms. Partial correlations are shown.
Thicker lines between nodes represent stronger relationships. Edges that were not significantly different from zero were removed from the networks.
Symptom label descriptions: Feelovereat = feel like | have overeaten; thinkdiet = thinking about dieting; desirethin = preoccupied with the desire to be
thinner; feargain = terrified of gaining weight; exercise = excessive exercise; binge = binge eating; bodycheck = body checking; weighself = weighed
myself; restrict = restriction; vomit = vomiting or other compensatory behaviors [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

from the networks presented. First, desire for thinness emerged as a weight and shape and fear of weight gain are central symptoms in BN
central symptom across each of the group-level models (temporal, pathology (DuBois et al., 2017; Forbush et al., 2016; Levinson et al.,
contemporaneous, and between-subject). These findings align with 2017). Indeed, the between-subjects network is a replication of these
recent cross-sectional network analyses finding that overvaluation of prior cross-sectional network models. Desire for thinness and
Temporal network Contemporaneous network Between-subjects network
InStrength OutStrength
weighself - weighself - weighself +
vomit + 4 vomit - vomit 4
thinkdiet - & thinkdiet + thinkdiet -
restrict 7 e restnct + restrict 4
feelovereat - o feelovereat + feelovereat +
feargain- z feargain - feargain +
exercise 7 exercise 7 exercise *
desirethin + desirethin > desirethin 4
bodycheck ~ bodycheck * bodycheck -
binge - binge - binge +
-1.0-050.0 05 1.0 15 O 1 -1 0 1 -1 0 1 2

FIGURE 2 Strength centrality graphs for group-level network. Note. Higher values indicate that a node is more central to the network. Green
dots indicate central cognitions and blue dots indicate central behaviors. Symptom label descriptions: Feelovereat = feel like | have overeaten;
thinkdiet = thinking about dieting; desirethin = preoccupied with the desire to be thinner; feargain = terrified of gaining weight;

exercise = excessive exercise; binge = binge eating; bodycheck = body checking; weighself = weighed myself; restrict = restriction;

vomit = vomiting or other compensatory behaviors [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON €T AL.

International Journal of | 1239

Participant |

| thinkdhet

| restrict |

| restrict } { thinkdiet |

y ¥
weighselt }
desirathin | AN
“
/
a soars
\ }
feargain

Participant 2

WILEY EATING DISORDERS

Participant 3

\ binge } thinkdiet |

/ \ / hotychect ]
teearworexe | \ /
x | feargain | SDB feargam \
-" } ” ail } 3 y ‘
| desirothen ~y \
\ he | exercise |

| vomit ) | restrict |

vomit

FIGURE 3 Temporal and contemporaneous networks for three individuals with AN. Temporal networks are on top; contemporaneous on
bottom. Note. Green lines indicate positive relationship and red line indicate negative relationship. Thicker lines between nodes represent
stronger relationships. Symptom label descriptions: Feelovereat = feel like | have overeaten; thinkdiet = thinking about dieting;

desirethin = preoccupied with the desire to be thinner; feargain = terrified of gaining weight; exercise = excessive exercise; binge = binge eating;
bodycheck = body checking; weighself = weighed myself; restrict = restriction; vomit = vomiting or other compensatory behaviors [Color figure

can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com|

overvaluation of weight and shape have long been considered core
symptoms of ED pathology, both theoretically and empirically
(e.g., Chernyak & Lowe, 2010; Dalley & Buunk, 2011; Fairburn, Sha-
fran, & Cooper, 1999). These networks provide additional evidence
that desire for thinness may play a possible maintaining role on aver-
age in ED pathology within-individuals and temporally across time.
Second, EDs are extremely heterogeneous in symptom presenta-
tion and in response to treatment. This statement is by no means a
new idea in the ED literature, as much literature recognizes the het-
erogeneity present (e.g., Castellini et al., 2011; Eddy et al., 2008; Fair-
burn & Cooper, 2011; Fairweather-Schmidt & Wade, 2014; Forbush
et al., 2017; Krug et al., 2013; Luo, Donnellan, & Klump, 2016; Stice,
2016; Stice, Marti, Shaw, & Jaconis, 2009; Sysko, Hildebrandt, Wilson,
Wilfley, & Agras, 2010; Thomas, Vartanian, & Brownell, 2009; Tozzi
et al., 2005). However, we found that even within three individuals
with the same diagnosis (AN), the associations between ED pathology
are vastly different. Furthermore, core symptoms that maintain AN
pathology likely significantly differ across individuals. In other words,
while our treatments are designed based on group-level averages and
to target similar symptoms maintaining EDs across _ individuals,
researchers need to recognize that maintaining symptoms are likely dif-

ferent for many, if not all, individuals who present for treatment. This

extreme heterogeneity may partially explain why such high numbers of
individuals do not respond to established treatments and establishes a
method that researchers might use to improve existing treatments
(Castellini et al., 2014; Sysko et al., 2010). Our treatments need to
incorporate within-person differences in ED cognitions and behaviors

and develop or tailor treatments based on these differences.

4.2 | Importance of time and type of model

While we await replication of the results presented here with addi-
tional data points and larger samples, there are some tentative fine-
grained hypotheses that can be generated from the temporal, contem-
poraneous, between-subjects, and intra-individual network models.
Each of these networks represents a different level of analysis, each
holding unique insights for the ED field. Using averages (group aver-
age), we were able to parse out within and between-subjects relation-
ships (see Figure 1). We found that weighing predicted restricting at
the next time point (4 hr: temporal network), illustrating a possible
causal relationship between these variables. However, there was no
relationship between weighing and restricting at the same time point
(contemporaneous network). This finding indicates that weighing and
restriction are not occurring concurrently, but rather that weighing is

leading to later restricting. Alternatively, weighing and body checking

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON ET AL.

140 | WHT EY
EATING DISORDERS
Participant |
weighself
restrict
vomit
overeat restrict
overeat
feargain
feargain
excercise
dieting
dieting
desirethin desirethin
bodycheck
bodycheck
binge

Participant 2

Participant 3

restrict

overeat

feargain

excercise

dieting

desirethin

bodycheck

ry ‘ 4
U 2

0 1 1 0

FIGURE 4 Strength centrality graphs for individual contemporaneous networks. Note. Higher values indicate that a node is more central to the
network. Green dots indicate central cognitions and blue dots indicate central behaviors. Symptom label descriptions: Overeat = feel like | have
overeaten; dieting = thinking about dieting; desirethin = preoccupied with the desire to be thinner; feargain = terrified of gaining weight;
exercise = excessive exercise; binge = binge eating; bodycheck = body checking; weighself = weighed myself; restrict = restriction;

vomit = vomiting or other compensatory behaviors [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

frequently co-occurred at the same time with a moderate relationship
between these symptoms, suggesting that one may trigger another
within a short time frame (contemporaneous network). Notably, there
are also several negative relationships within each of these models,
primarily between cognitions and behaviors. These edges might repre-
sent that cognitions are weakened by behaviors, functioning similarly
to obsessions and compulsions in obsessive-compulsive disorder,
which has also been supported by previous recent research (Levinson
et al., 2018). These findings also show how both temporal and con-
temporaneous networks can offer unique insights into the structure
of ED psychopathology. Finally, these results also show how under-
standing the time frame in the relationship between symptoms can
allow us to target them more effectively and how time is important

for the conceptualization of what maintains psychopathology.

4.3. | Temporal networks

A temporal network tests on average how within-individuals symptoms
impact each other across time (Figure 1, model 1). This type of model
allows researchers to identify longitudinal relationships among symp-
toms on average. In other words, on average restriction might lead to
binge eating 4 hrs later. In this data, in the temporal network, which
focuses on approximately a 4-hr time range, cognitions related to desire
for thinness received input from exercise, binge eating, and body check-
ing behaviors, whereas drive for thinness sent input to weighing oneself
and restriction. In other words, future research should test if desire for
thinness is at the crux of a complex illness pathway with several other
ED cognitions and behaviors impacting themselves across time. Desire
for thinness is linked to several symptoms in all three networks, which
shows Its importance in likely maintaining ED psychopathology for both

shorter and longer time intervals, as well as demonstrating the utility of

understanding how symptoms impact each other across specific time

points on average across individuals (4 hr; temporal network).

4.4 | Contemporaneous networks

A contemporaneous network represents a snapshot in time (one time
point), while controlling for the temporal relationships presented in
the temporal network (Figure 1, model 2). This model allows
researchers to identify how symptoms operate together at one time
point (on average across individuals) while accounting for relationships
between these symptoms in the previous measurement. Contempora-
neous networks allow us to identify possible causal relationships
between variables that occur faster than the measured time interval
(i.e., 4 hr). For example, feeling like one has overeaten may trigger
thoughts about dieting within several minutes. Such relationships
would not be identified in the temporal and within-subjects network.
In our data in the contemporaneous network, the four cognitions
(desire for thinness, fears of weight gain, thinking about dieting, and
feeling like one has overeaten) are very closely connected with the
ED behaviors branching off from these closely connected cognitions.
This relationship was also seen in the between-subjects network. We
hypothesize that ED cognitions related to desire for thinness and fear
of weight gain have a cascade effect that then impact behaviors
(Arbuthnott, Lewis, & Bailey, 2015; Meeus, 2016; Selby, Anestis, &
Joiner, 2008). In other words, when an individual begins thinking one
ED cognition, these thoughts rapidly multiply and then influence ED
behaviors. This idea is consistent with the proposition in CBT theory
of a downward spiral of thoughts (e.g., Garner, Vitousek, & Pike, 1997).

These data also show the utility of a contemporaneous network.

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON €T AL.

International Journal of | 1241

4.5 | Between-subjects network

A between-subjects network shows on average across individuals
how symptoms relate to each other (without accounting for time)
(Figure 1, model 3). To date, all network models of ED psychopathol-
ogy (of which we are aware) have been cross-sectional between-
subjects models. These models are important for identifying the struc-
ture of psychopathology and for how EDs operate on average. They
provide a novel conceptualization of EDs (how symptoms interact and
maintain themselves), which informs the fields understanding of psy-
chopathology on average. Additionally, between-person data can
inform treatment development specifically for treatments provided in
group format and/or for treatment or prevention that is based on
averages, signifying what targets will most likely on average be the
optimal target. Our data replicate prior between-subjects networks,
showing the central importance of desire for thinness/overvaluation
of weight and shape (Dubois et al., 2017; Forbush et al., 2016; Levin-
son et al., 2017).

4.6 | Intraindividual networks

Intraindividual networks can be created within one person (Figure 3).
These models show how one individuals' ED symptoms relate to each
other. In the current data, in addition to demonstrating the high het-
erogeneity of ED cognitions and behaviors, the intra-individual net-
works show how network analysis might be used to funnel patients
into personalized interventions and/or how to identify targets for
novel personalized treatment development (see David et al., 2017;
Fisher et al., 2017 for examples on how this method has been applied
for treatment in the depression and anxiety literature). Thinking about
dieting was the most central symptom for participant 1, formulating
the hypothesis that this participant should start with treatment chal-
lenging thoughts around dieting. Binge eating and excessive exercise
were the most central symptoms for participant 2, formulating the
hypothesis that this participant should start treatment focused on
changing behaviors. Finally, restriction and thinking about over-eating
were the most central symptoms for participant 3, formulating the
hypothesis that this third participant should be directed into an inter-
vention that disrupts both behaviors (restriction) and cognitions
(thinking about over-eating). Future research should test if CBT-E can
be adapted into a modular format in which participants can be chan-
neled into a unit that specifically focuses on the most central main-
taining symptoms, as is being done in the anxiety disorder field with
the Unified Protocol for Emotional Disorders (Fernandez et al., 2017;
Fisher et al., 2017).

4.7 | Limitations and future research

We need to consider several limitations of this study. First and fore-
most, we had very few assessment points (28) and a small sample size.
Though there are no formal recommendations or conclusions as of
yet, but it has been suggested from simulation research for the mIVAR
(average, within-person networks) that it is ideal to have a large sam-
ple size with many assessment points and fewer nodes, though no
specific numeric guidelines exist (Epskamp, Waldorp, Mottus, & Bors-

boom, 2016). More research is needed with intensive longitudinal

WILEY EATING DISORDERS

data in a large sample of individuals with EDs. In directed networks,
the issue of time-frame in which the observed processes unfolds is
particularly important (Butts, 2009). If the measured interval (i.e., time
between observations) is different from the time-frame in which the
actual process unfolds, important relationships may not be observed.
For example, if drive for thinness is followed by excessive exercising
1 hr later, a network based on measurements every 4 hr may not
show this dynamic. Furthermore, our models are limited by the cogni-
tions and behaviors we chose to include. Again, given that network
analysis is a new methodology, there are no recommendations on
how to choose appropriate symptoms to include in our models. We
hope future researchers will consider this limitation and develop
empirical recommendations for determining which symptoms to
include. There are also currently no specific measures designed for
use in EMA for network analysis, and therefore, we do not know the
psychometric properties of the measure we used (although we did
strive to utilize symptoms from existing, psychometrically strong mea-
sures that have previously been utilized in EMA protocols; Mason
et al., 2017). Additionally, there has been no work yet on the replica-
bility of within-person networks. We also do not know if these find-
ings will replicate in larger more diagnostically diverse samples, such
as those that include a larger proportion of binge eating disorder
and/or bulimia nervosa. Specifically, in regard to our intra-individual
networks, we need additional data to establish if within-person net-
works will replicate or if variations in networks are due to chance. Our
results regarding the individual within-person networks should be
considered with care, such that it is possible that the heterogeneity
identified here could be due in part to instability in network struc-
tures. Regardless, this data shows how to apply network heterogene-
ity analyses to the eating disorders. We hope that future research will
create stability indices to test the reliability of the networks. Finally,
we should use caution when interpreting node centrality in these
types of networks (Epskamp et al., 2017). We hope that future
research will use psychometrically strong measures with large sample
sizes and many measurement points to help elucidate strong conclu-
sions to these questions.

Future research on heterogeneity should continue to assess het-
erogeneity using multiple types of models. For example, the Hierarchi-
cal Taxonomy Of Psychopathology (HiTOP) model (e.g., Kotov et al.,
2017), which conceptualizes mental disorders based on dimensional
taxomonies, the Research Domain Criteria approach (e.g., Insel et al.,
2010), which classifies mental disorders based on underlying dimen-
sions across multiple levels of analysis, as well as latent network
models, an emerging methodology that combines latent variable and
network models. These methodologies hold promise for our under-
standing of heterogeneity in psychopathology and we hypothesize
that a combination of these methods will lead to the greatest

breakthroughs.

5 | CONCLUSIONS

Despite these limitations, we think that both within- and between
person network analysis and intraindividual network analysis holds

significant promise for the ED field and the field of psychopathology

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 1202 | Wa

LEVINSON ET AL.

ILEY EATING DISORDERS

as a whole. The data presented here can be used for generating
hypotheses for future larger scale research, as well as for how to use
intraindividual network analyses in ED research. Using group-level
between and within person and _ intraindividual network analysis
allows us to, for the first time, identify how ED pathology maintains
itself both between and within individuals and to identify targets for
novel personalized treatment development. We now have a method
that can be used to address the extreme heterogeneity within EDs
and to develop and adapt treatments that can more clearly address

this complex form of psychopathology.

AUTHORSHIP

C.A.L. developed the concept for the study, collected data, oversaw
analyses, and wrote the manuscripts. I.V. and L.B. ran analyses,
assisted with conceptualization, and assisted with manuscript

preparation.

ORCID
Cheri A. Levinson © https://orcid.org/O000-0003-2359-5206

REFERENCES

Arbuthnott, A. E., Lewis, S. P., & Bailey, H. N. (2015). Rumination and emo-
tions in nonsuicidal self-injury and eating disorder behaviors: A prelimi-
nary test of the emotional Cascade model. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 71, 62-71.

Asparouhov, T., Hamaker, E. L., & Muthén, B. (2018). Dynamic structural
equation models. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Jour-
nal, 25(3), 359-388. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2017.
1406803

Bardone-Cone, A. M., Harney, M. B., Maldonado, C. R., Lawson, M. A.,
Robinson, D. P., Smith, R., & Tosh, A. (2010). Defining recovery from
an eating disorder: Conceptualization, validation, and examination of
psychosocial functioning and _ psychiatric comorbidity. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48, 194-202.

Borsboom, D. (2017). A network theory of mental disorders. World Psychi-
atry, 16, 5-13.

Borsboom, D., & Cramer, A. O. (2013). Network analysis: An integrative
approach to the structure of psychopathology. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 9, 91-121.

Borsboom, D., Cramer, A. O., Schmittmann, V. D., Epskamp, S., &
Waldorp, L. J. (2011). The small world of psychopathology. PLoS One,
6, e27407.

Boschloo, L. van Borkulo, C. D., Rhemtulla, M., Keyes, K. M.,
Borsboom, D., & Schoevers, R. A. (2015). The network structure of
symptoms of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
PLoS One, 10, e€0137621.

Bringmann, L. F., Lemmens, L. H. J. M., Huibers, M. J. H., Borsboom, D., &
Tuerlinckx, F. (2015). Revealing the dynamic network structure of the
Beck depression inventory- Il. Psychological Medicine, 45, 747-757.

Bringmann, L. F., Vissers, N., Wichers, M., Geschwind, N., Kuppens, P.,
Peeters, F., ... Tuerlinckx, F. (2013). A network approach to psychopa-
thology: New insights into clinical longitudinal data. PLoS One, 8,
e60188.

Butts, C. T. (2009). Revisiting the foundations of network analysis. Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science, 325(5939), 414-416.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1171022

Castellini, G., Montanelli, L., Faravelli, C., & Ricca, V. (2014). Eating disorder
outpatients who do not respond to cognitive behavioral therapy: A
follow-up study. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 83, 125-127.

Chernyak, Y., & Lowe, M. R. (2010). Motivations for dieting: Drive for thin-
ness is different from drive for objective thinness. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 119, 276-281.

Dalley, S. E., & Buunk, A. P. (2011). The motivation to diet in young
women: Fear is stronger than hope. European Journal of Social Psychol-
ogy, 41, 672-680.

Danielsen, Y. S., Rekkedal, G. A., Frostad, S., & Kessler, U. (2016). Effec-
tiveness of enhanced cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT-E) in the treat-
ment of anorexia nervosa: A prospective multidisciplinary study. BMC
Psychiatry, 16, 342-356.

David, S. J., Marshall, A. J., Evanovich, E. K., & Mumma, G. H. (2017).
Intraindividual dynamic network analysis-implications for clinical
assessment. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment,
40, 1-14.

Eddy, K. T., Dorer, D. J. Franko, D. L,  Tahilani, — K,,
Thompson-Brenner, H., & Herzog, D. B. (2008). Diagnostic crossover
in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: Implications for DSM-V.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 245-250.

Epskamp, S., Borsboom, D., & Fried, E. |. (2017a). Estimating psychological
networks and their accuracy: A tutorial paper. Behavior Research
Methods, 50, 1-18.

Epskamp, S., Cramer, A. O. J., Waldorp, L. J., Schmittmann, V. D., &
Borsboom, D. (2012). Qgraph: Network visualizations of relationships
in psychometric data. Journal of Statistical Software, 48, 1-18.

Epskamp, S., Deserno, M. K., & Bringmann, L. F. (2017b). mIVAR:
Multi-level vector autoregression [Computer software manual].
(R package version 0.4).

Epskamp, S., van Borkulo, C., Servaas, M. N., Isvoranu, A. M., Riese, H., &
Cramer, A. (2017c). Personalized network modeling in psychopathol-
ogy: The importance of contemporaneous and temporal connections.
Available at: psyarxiv.com/jnprz.

Epskamp, S., Waldorp, L. J., Mottus, R., & Borsboom, D. (2016). Discover-
ing psychological dynamics: The Gaussian graphical model in
cross-sectional and time-series data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04156.

Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders.
New York, NY: Guilford Press.

Fairburn, C. G., Bailey-Straebler, S., Basden, S., Doll, H. A., Jones, R.,
Murphy, R., ... Cooper, Z. (2015). A transdiagnostic comparison of
enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT-E) and interpersonal psy-
chotherapy in the treatment of eating disorders. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 70, 64-71.

Fairburn, C. G., & Cooper, Z. (2011). Eating disorders, DSM-5 and clinical
reality. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 198, 8-10.

Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & Shafran, R. (2003). Cognitive behaviour ther-
apy for eating disorders: A “transdiagnostic” theory and treatment.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41, 509-528.

Fairburn, C. G., Shafran, R., & Cooper, Z. (1999). A cognitive behavioural
theory of anorexia nervosa. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, 1-13.

Fairweather-Schmidt, A. K., & Wade, T. D. (2014). DSM-5 eating disorders
and other specified eating and feeding disorders: Is there a meaningful
differentiation? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 47, 524-533.

Fernandez, K. C., Fisher, A. J., & Chi, C. (2017). Development and initial
implementation of the dynamic assessment treatment algorithm
(DATA). PLoS One, 12, e€0178806.

Fisher, A. J., Reeves, J. W., Lawyer, G., Medaglia, J. D., & Rubel, J. A.
(2017). Exploring the idiographic dynamics of mood and anxiety via
network analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126, 1044-1056.

Forbush, K. T., Hagan, K. E., Kite, B. A.. Chapa, D. A., Bohrer, B. K., &
Gould, S. R. (2017). Understanding eating disorders within internalizing
psychopathology: A novel transdiagnostic, hierarchical-dimensional
model. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 79, 40-52.

Forbush, K. T., Siew, C. S. Q., & Vitevitch, M. S. (2016). Application of net-
work analysis to identify interactive systems of eating disorder psycho-
pathology. Psychological Medicine, 46, 2667-2677.

Fried, E. |., Epskamp, S., Nesse, R. M., Tuerlinckx, F., & Borsboom, D.
(2016). What are “good” depression symptoms? Comparing the cen-
trality of DSM and non-DSM symptoms of depression in a network
analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders, 189, 314-320.

Fried, E. |., van Borkulo, C. D., Cramer, A. O., Boschloo, L.,
Schoevers, R. A., & Borsboom, D. (2017). Mental disorders as networks

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
 LEVINSON €T AL.

International Journal of | 1243

of problems: A review of recent insights. Social Psychiatry and Psychiat-
ric Epidemiology, 52, 1-10.

Garner, D. M., Olmstead, M. P., & Polivy, J. (1983). Development and
validation of a multidimensional eating disorder inventory for
anorexia nervosa and bulimia. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
2, 15-34.

Garner, D. M., Vitousek, K. M., & Pike, K. M. (1997). Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for anorexia nervosa. In D. M. Garner & E. Garfinkel (Eds.),
Handbook of treatment for eating disorders (pp. 121-134). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.

Haan-Rietdijk, S., Voelkle, M. C., Keijsers, L., & Hamaker, E. L. (2017). Dis-
crete- vs. continuous-time modeling of unequally spaced experience
sampling method data. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 1849. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01849

Hamaker, E. L. (2012). Why researchers should think “within-person”: A
paradigmatic rationale. In M. R. Mehl & T. S. Conner (Eds.), Handbook
of research methods for studying daily life (pp. 43-61). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.

Insel, T. R. (2014). The NIMH research domain criteria (RDoC) project: Pre-
cision medicine for psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 171,
395-397.

Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K., ... &
Wang, P. (2010). Research domain criteria (RDoC): Toward a new clas-
sification framework for research on mental disorders.

Kendler, K. S., Zachar, P., & Craver, C. (2011). What kinds of things are
psychiatric disorders? Psychological Medicine, 41, 1143-1150.

Klump, K. L., Bulik, C. M., Kaye, W. H., Treasure, J., & Tyson, E. (2009).
Academy for eating disorders position paper: Eating disorders are seri-
ous mental illnesses. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 42,
97-103.

Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., Althoff, R. R.,
Bagby, R. M., ... Eaton, N. R. (2017). The hierarchical taxonomy of psy-
chopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional alternative to traditional nosol-
ogies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126(4), 454-477.

Krug, |. Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Micali, N.,  Anderluh, M.,
Fernandez-Aranda, F., Tchanturia, K., ... Treasure, J. (2013). The corre-
lates of diagnostic instability in eating disorders: The role of psychopa-
thology, environmental risk factors, personality and genes. Journal of
Eating Disorders, 1, O43.

Levinson, C. A., Sala, M., Fewell, L., Brosof, L. C., Fournier, L., & Lenze, E. J.
(2018). Meal and snack-time eating disorder cognitions predict eating
disorder behaviors and vice versa in a treatment seeking sample: A
mobile technology based ecological momentary assessment study..
Behaviour research and therapy, 105, 36-42.

Levinson, C. A., Zerwas, S., Calebs, B., Forbush, K., Kordy, H., Watson, H.,
... Runfola, C. D. (2017). The core symptoms of bulimia nervosa, anxi-
ety, and depression: A network analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychol-
ogy, 126, 340-354.

Linardon, J., Fairburn, C. G., Fitzsimmons-Craft, E. E., Wilfley, D. E., &
Brennan, L. (2017). The empirical status of the third-wave behaviour
therapies for the treatment of eating disorders: A systematic review.
Clinical Psychology Review, 58, 125-140.

Luo, X., Donnellan, M. B., Burt, S. A., & Klump, K. L. (2016). The dimen-
sional nature of eating pathology: Evidence from a direct comparison
of categorical, dimensional, and hybrid models. Journal of Abnormal Psy-
chology, 125, 715-726.

Mason, T. B., Smith, K. E., Crosby, R. D., Wonderlich, S. A., Crow, S. J.,
Engel, S. G., & Peterson, C. B. (2017). Does the eating disorder exami-
nation questionnaire global subscale adequately predict eating disorder

WILEY EATING DISORDERS

psychopathology in the daily life of obese adults? Eating and Weight
Disorders-Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and Obesity, 1-6.

McNally, R. J. (2016). Can network analysis transform psychopathology?
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 86, 95-104.

Meeus, W. (2016). Adolescent psychosocial development: A review of lon-
gitudinal models and _ research. Developmental Psychology, 52,
1969-1993.

Murray, S. B., Loeb, K. L., & Le Grange, D. (2015). Moderators and mediators
of treatments for youths with eating disorders. In M. Maric, P. M. Prins, &
T. H. Ollendick (Eds.), Moderators and mediators of youth treatment out-
comes (pp. 210-299). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Nelson, B., McGorry, P. D., Wichers, M., Wigman, J. T., & Hartmann, J. A.
(2017). Moving from static to dynamic models of the onset of mental
disorder: A review. JAMA Psychiatry, 74, 528-534.

Olatunji, B. O., Levinson, C., & Calebs, B. (2018). A network analysis of eat-
ing disorder symptoms and characteristics in an inpatient sample. Psy-
chiatry research, 262, 270-281.

Selby, E. A., Anestis, M. D., & Joiner, T. E. (2008). Understanding the rela-
tionship between emotional and behavioral dysregulation: Emotional
cascades. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 46, 593-611.

Stice, E. (2016). Interactive and mediational etiologic models of eating dis-
order onset: Evidence from prospective studies. Annual Review of Clini-
cal Psychology, 12, 359-381.

Stice, E., Fisher, M., & Martinez, E. (2004). Eating disorder diagnostic scale:
Additional evidence of reliability and validity. Psychological Assessment,
16, 60-71.

Stice, E., Marti, C. N., Shaw, H., & Jaconis, M. (2009). An 8-year longitudi-
nal study of the natural history of threshold, subthreshold, and partial
eating disorders from a community sample of adolescents. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 118, 587-597.

Stice, E., Telch, C. F., & Rizvi, S. L. (2000). Development and validation of the
eating disorder diagnostic scale: A brief self-report measure of anorexia,
bulimia, and binge-eating disorder. Psychological Assessment, 12, 123-131.

Sysko, R., Hildebrandt, T., Wilson, G. T., Wilfley, D. E., & Agras, W. S.
(2010). Heterogeneity moderates treatment response among patients
with binge eating disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
78, 681-690.

Thomas, J. J., Vartanian, L. R., & Brownell, K. D. (2009). The relationship
between eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS) and offi-
cially recognized eating disorders: Meta-analysis and implications for
DSM. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 407-433.

Tozzi, F., Thornton, L. M., Klump, K. L., Fichter, M. M., Halmi, K. A.,
Kaplan, A. S., ... Rotondo, A. (2005). Symptom fluctuation in eating dis-
orders: Correlates of diagnostic crossover. American Journal of Psychia-
try, 162, 732-740.

Wild, B., Eichler, M., Friederich, H.-C., Hartmann, M., Zipfel, S., &
Herzog, W. (2010). A graphical vector autoregressive modelling
approach to the analysis of electronic diary data. BMC Medical Research
Methodology, 10, 28-41.

How to cite this article: Levinson CA, Vanzhula |, Brosof LC.
Longitudinal and personalized networks of eating disorder
cognitions and behaviors: Targets for precision intervention a
proof of concept study. Int J Eat Disord. 2018;51:1233-1243.
https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.22952

QSUDOT'T SUOIIOD SATIVAI_D afqvordde oyi Aq pouIoAos ore sponse WO ‘asn Jo sapns Joy ATeIQr] uT[UG Aa[I AA UO (SUOTIPUOS-pue-sULIAy/WIOS Kopi Arerqipaurpuo//:sdyyy) SUOTIpUOD pu suLIay, ay) 99S *[PZ0Z/80/ZI] UO ATeIQYT OUTTUG AZILAA ‘ZO lund @HAOquiowl-<yaoqqrys> Aq ZS6ZZ'I89/ZOOI OL /lop/wios Aoyama’ Arerqipourpuo//:sdyy Wor peproyumog ‘TI ‘8107 ‘X801 8601
