Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-020-09462-w

ORIGINAL PAPER

®

Check for
updates

A Network-Based Examination of the Longitudinal
Association Between Psychopathy and Offending Versatility

Evan McCuish'® - Martin Bouchard! - Eric Beauregard

Published online: 28 May 2020
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020

Abstract

Objectives Concerns about the value of features of psychopathy to explanations of offend-
ing may be driven by challenges with testing this relationship as opposed to the construct’s
limited predictive validity. The current study introduced psychopathology network mode-
ling as an analytic strategy capable of addressing these challenges through a more nuanced
description of the structural and statistical association between features of psychopathy and
offending. To provide more direct implications for criminological theory and research, this
included examining whether within-individual changes in features of psychopathy were
associated with within-individual change in offending.

Methods Data on male and female young offenders from the Pathways to Desistance
Study (1=1354) were used to examine the association between features of psychopathy
and offending versatility, as measured by the Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory and the
Self Report of Offending scale, respectively. Three network structures were modeled that
separated the variance in the relationship between features of psychopathy and offending
into between-subjects and within-individual networks.

Results Between-subjects and within-individual analyses indicated that interpersonal and
affective features of psychopathy were positively associated with offending versatility. The
network approach indicated that remorselessness and manipulativeness were central fea-
tures of psychopathy that were also associated with offending versatility. Remorselessness
in particular helped bridge together conceptually distinct features of psychopathy.
Conclusions Psychopathology network modeling illustrated the value of features of psy-
chopathy to mainstream criminological theory and research. These features included
interpersonal and affective deficits, which previously were identified as poor predictors of
offending outcomes.

Keywords Developmental criminology - Network science - Psychopathology networks -
Psychopathy - Young offenders

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s 1094
0-020-09462-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

bX) Evan McCuish
ecm2 @sfu.ca

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

D) Springer
 694 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

Introduction

Although population heterogeneity theoretical perspectives commonly pinpoint low self
control as the key indicator of antisocial propensity (Gottfredson and Hirschi 1990; Nagin
and Paternoster 2000), the constellation of features that comprise psychopathy may better
measure antisocial propensity (Corrado et al. 2015). This is because psychopathy encapsu-
lates features of low self control (e.g., sensation-seeking, impulsivity, irresponsibility) but
also interpersonal deficits such as manipulativeness, deceitfulness, and interpersonal domi-
nance. Such characteristics influence negative interactions with others that are asserted to
increase the likelihood of offending (Corrado et al. 2015). Psychopathy also includes affec-
tive deficits such as callous-unemotional (CU) traits, disregard for the well-being of others,
and a lack of empathy. Such characteristics are associated with poorer responses to treat-
ment (Olver et al. 2013a) and less sensitivity to the feelings of others (Salekin 2016), both
of which imply that an individual may continue offending (Corrado et al. 2015). Accord-
ingly, several arguments have been made for the incorporation of psychopathy into main-
stream criminological theory and research (DeLisi 2016; Farrington 2005; Fox et al. 2015).
At the same time, prior empirical work showed that total scores on a measure of psychopa-
thy was not as important to criminal behavior compared to self-control alone (DeLisi et al.
2018). A problem with examining total scores is that it disregards the possible multidimen-
sional nature of psychopathy (e.g., its underlying interpersonal, affective, and behavioral
dimensions). The aim of the current study was to explore the importance of psychopa-
thy to criminological theory and research by using psychopathology network modeling to
investigate both between-person and within-individual effects of features of psychopathy
on offending while also modeling interrelationships between these different features to pro-
vide a better understanding of the nature of this construct.

Evidence of the Relationship Between Psychopathy and Offending

Despite evidence that psychopathy is one of the most important risk factors for criminal
behavior (Hart 1998), debate about the appropriate number and nature of its underlying
dimensions (see Hare and Neumann 2010; Skeem and Cooke 2010) helped identify an
important issue for further research. On the one hand, studies using prototypicality analy-
ses, item-response theory, and psychopathology networks indicated that individual features
of psychopathy associated with its interpersonal and affective dimensions were core fea-
tures of psychopathy! whereas behavioral features and criminal behavior associated with
its lifestyle and antisocial dimensions were not (Cooke and Michie 1997; Kreis et al. 2012;
McCuish et al. 2019; Preszler et al. 2018; Verschuere et al. 2018). On the other hand, dis-
aggregation of psychopathy total scores typically revealed that behavioral and criminal
behavior dimensions were related to recidivism, but its interpersonal and affective dimen-
sions were not (Colins et al. 2012; Edens et al. 2007; Kennealy et al. 2010; Leistico et al.
2008; Olver et al. 2013b; Walters 2012). Put differently, the features that most poorly repre-
sented the psychopathy construct were often identified as the only features of psychopathy
related to criminal behavior.

' We use the term “features of psychopathy” to describe individual traits that comprise the overarching
construct and “psychopathy” to describe the co-occurrence of these features.

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 695

These findings, taken together with concern that the relationship between psychopa-
thy and offending was accounted for by low self control (e.g., DeLisi et al. 2018; Walters
2004), directly challenge the value of integrating psychopathy within criminological theory
and research. Psychopathy may have little to add to criminological theory given that prior
criminal behavior and low self control are accounted for by in other theories (e.g., Got-
tfredson and Hirschi 1990). However, we suggest that there are two challenges that come
with testing the relationship between psychopathy and offending that should be addressed
before making conclusions about this construct’s importance to offending and criminologi-
cal theory.

The first challenge concerns how the psychopathy construct should be represented
when modeling its association with offending. There are two common approaches. The
first uses total scores on a measurement tool to predict offending outcomes. The second
examines individual features of psychopathy (e.g., CU traits) independently from other fea-
tures (see Salekin et al. 2018). Both approaches have been criticized. Some argued against
using instrument total scores to predict offending because this approach masked important
information about the contributions of specific features of psychopathy (Fanti et al. 2018).
Using total scores does not allow researchers to unpack whether the relationship between
psychopathy and offending was solely due to behavioral features of the disorder. Others
argued that examining features of psychopathy in isolation was inappropriate because the
full psychopathy construct is poorly represented by the manifestation of just a single fea-
ture (e.g., Salekin et al. 2018). Further, examining features of psychopathy in isolation
ignored potentially important interactions (Lilienfeld 2018) given the interrelated nature of
personality traits that comprise the psychopathy construct (Gottfried et al. 2019). In sum,
both of these common approaches have received criticism that has left researchers in the
dark regarding how to represent psychopathy test scores in statistical models.

Researchers have recommended addressing these criticisms by including interpersonal,
affective, and behavior dimensions of psychopathy in the same model to elucidate their
relative importance to the development of offending (e.g., Colins et al. 2012; Ridder and
Kosson 2018) as well as how these dimensions interact (Lilienfeld 2018; Salekin et al.
2018). This recommendation is based on the idea that if psychopathy is a multidimensional
construct, it should be represented as such in tests of its relationship with offending. How-
ever, when different dimensions have been included simultaneously to examine offending
outcomes, only the behavioral dimension tended to emerge as important for offending (e.g.,
Edens et al. 2007; Kennealy et al. 2010; Olver et al. 2013a, b; Walters 2012). In sum, it
is possible to conclude that while psychopathy may be a multidimensional construct, its
interpersonal and affective dimensions do not increase the risk of offending. Before reach-
ing such a conclusion, it may be necessary to look more closely at the features that com-
prise these dimensions. Disaggregation may reveal interpersonal and affective features that
are important to offending.

Disaggregation of dimensions results in the simultaneous testing of a wide range of dif-
ferent features of psychopathy. It is necessary to examine these features simultaneously
to avoid reigniting concern about examining different features of psychopathy in isola-
tion given that this may not appropriately reflect the manifestation of the construct (e.g.,
Lilienfeld 2018; Salekin et al. 2018). Avoiding these earlier concerns raises a separate
issue, which is that an appropriate analytic strategy must be able to model interrelation-
ships between many different features of psychopathy, whether each feature is related to
offending, and in doing so must avoid identifying spurious relationships (i.e., Type I error).
Such an analytic strategy should also facilitate the modeling of interrelationship between
these features akin to the proposed multidimensional nature of the disorder. The ability to

D) Springer
 696 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

examine interrelationships between features of psychopathy, and not just how these fea-
tures relate to offending, is useful for examining questions about psychopathy as a disorder
versus as a constellation of co-occurring traits.” In the absence of an appropriate analytic
strategy, important questions remain regarding which features of psychopathy are most
important to the disorder (Salekin 2016), whether criminal behavior is one such feature
(Hare and Neumann 2010) or better characterized as an outcome of the disorder (Skeem
and Cooke 2010), and whether there is overlap between the features that are core to psy-
chopathy and the features that predict offending.

The second major challenge pertains to how to test the relationship between features
of psychopathy and offending in ways that address questions pertinent to criminological
theory and research. While there have been recommendations for incorporating psychopa-
thy into mainstream criminological theory (e.g., Corrado et al. 2015; DeLisi 2016; Fox
et al. 2015), the utility of psychopathy has been demonstrated primarily through its ability
to predict recidivism (Corrado et al. 2015; c.f., Colins et al. 2015; Walters 2015; Vahl et al.
2014). This represents a misalignment between criminology theoretical interests and psy-
chopathy research. Several major criminological perspectives, especially those with origins
in criminal career research and developmental life course (DLC) criminology, are not as
concerned with single-item indicators of offending (1.e., recidivism). Examining offend-
ing during just one period in the life course does not address questions about the impact of
within-individual change in risk factors on within-individual change in offending (Loeber
and Le Blanc 1990). In sum, conclusions about the limited utility of psychopathy beyond
its behavioral features were primarily based on studies that used between-group compari-
sons and relied on single-item indicators of offending measured at one time-point, which
has relatively limited implications for criminological theory and research.

Using Psychopathology Network Modeling to Address Challenges in Testing
the Relationship Between Psychopathy and Offending

Although network science is not new to criminology, it is primarily used to examine social
interactions among individuals via social network analysis (SNA; e.g., Bouchard and
Malm 2016; McGloin and Kirk 2010). SNA is concerned with the structural properties
of groups of individuals, including how these individuals are connected through differ-
ent types of social relations (e.g., co-offenders) and whether the nature of social relation-
ships is informative of individual and group behavior (Knoke and Yang 2008; Wasserman
and Faust 1994). In SNA, nodes are used to represent individuals or groups and an edge
between them represents the nature of the relationship (e.g., co-offenders, members of the
same gang, gangs in conflict). Instead of using individuals or groups as the unit of analysis,
psychopathology networks focus on the structure of individual-level characteristics (e.g.,
symptoms of mental disorders; Borsboom and Cramer 2013). Nodes represent symptoms
or behaviors and edges represent the magnitude of the association between nodes. As in
SNA, psychopathology networks use various indices to identify which nodes are most cen-
tral to the network (Opsahl et al. 2010). In SNA, degree centrality identifies which indi-
viduals or groups are most well-connected to all other individuals or groups in the network.

* This is not to suggest that the only possible conclusion is that psychopathy is a network of co-occurring
traits; there are multiple perspectives on the nature or structure of psychopathy and this paper does not pro-
vide an answer as to the relative importance of these different perspectives (see Lilienfeld et al. 2019).

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 697

Betweenness centrality identifies which individuals or groups are depended upon as “‘bro-
kers” between otherwise unconnected individuals or groups (Freeman 1977). In psycho-
pathology networks, strength centrality is the equivalent to degree centrality in SNA and
identifies which symptoms or behaviors are most well-connected (e.g., the absolute weight
of all correlation coefficients) to all other symptoms or behaviors in the network. Between-
ness centrality identifies which symptoms or behaviors are depended upon as bridges
between conceptually distinct symptoms or behaviors and can help explain the etiology of
multidimensional constructs.

Psychopathology networks do not simply illustrate interrelationships between nodes;
they help visualize the structure of relationships (or lack thereof) between nodes within a
network (see Borsboom and Cramer 2013 for a review). For example, two nodes may not
share an edge despite being close to one another in the network. This information indicates
conceptual similarity between nodes but also that their shared relations with other nodes
in the network fully accounts for the association between these two. Such information may
indicate redundancies in the network. Network structure can also illustrate how conceptu-
ally distinct nodes (1.e., nodes located on opposite sides of the network) nevertheless share
a Statistical relationship. Broadly speaking, psychopathology networks can address a range
of questions that have implications for criminological theory, research, and policy. This
is especially true with respect to uncovering the structure of relationships between multi-
item constructs (e.g., adverse childhood experiences, low self control, psychosocial matu-
rity, temperament) and offending, including which items are most important to the con-
struct (i.e., based on network centrality) and which items are most important for criminal
behavior.

Psychopathy is one such multi-item construct and network analyses may help address
debates regarding which features are the most important to the disorder and whether inter-
personal and affective features are associated with criminal behavior, even after controlling
for features similar to low self control (Walters 2004). Unlike cluster analyses, psychopa-
thology network modeling does not identify groups of individuals according to the degree
or nature of their test scores. Psychopathology network modeling satisfies recent interest in
studying interrelationships among different features of psychopathy and their association
with offending (Lilienfeld 2018; Salekin et al. 2018). It also is capable of addressing ques-
tions unique to DLC principles, such as the relationship between within-individual change
in features of psychopathy and within-individual change in offending.

Current Study

The current study used psychopathology network modeling to address calls for research
that looks beyond the predictive validity of individual features of psychopathy in isola-
tion (e.g., CU traits) while also investigating the relative importance of different features
of psychopathy and the interrelationships among such features (e.g., Ridder and Kosson
2018; Lilienfeld 2018; Salekin et al. 2018). This was done by simultaneously modeling
the interrelationships among features of psychopathy as well as the relationships between
these features and offending. This allowed the study to describe the structural properties of
psychopathy, which provided context to statistical associations between such features and
offending. This approach specifically addressed Lilienfeld’s (2018) suggestion that research
on psychopathy awaited “a better understanding of its subdimensions, their interrelations”
(p. 83). Whereas prior studies focused almost exclusively on recidivism, psychopathology
network modeling was used to analyze, from both between-subjects and within-individual

D) Springer
 698 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

perspectives, the longitudinal relationship between repeated measures of features of psy-
chopathy and a multi-item measure of offending. This approach allowed for a more direct
interpretation of the value of psychopathy to criminological theory by (a) using an ana-
lytic strategy that aligned with DLC interests in within-individual change and (b) helping
unpack the specific features of psychopathy useful for understanding offending.

Method
Sample and Procedures

Data were used from the Pathways to Desistance Study, which involved interviews with
adolescent male (n=1170) and female (n=184) offenders from Phoenix, Arizona and
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Archived data were made available by the Interuniversity Con-
sortium for Political and Social Research (Mulvey 2013). Participants were convicted of
at least one crime and approximately half of the sample had a history of felony violent
crimes. Male participants involved in drug-related crimes was limited to a maximum of
15% of the sample to capture more serious offenders. Computer-assisted interviews were
performed in the homes of participants, in public, and in correctional facilities. Partici-
pants were informed that the interview was confidential except in instances of suspected
child abuse or imminent danger to others. Most participants were Black (41.4%), Hispanic
(33.5%), or White (20.2%). The remaining sample were listed as ‘Other’ (4.8%). Youth
were an average of 16.04 years old (SD=1.14) at their first interview. Follow-up inter-
views were conducted at six-month intervals for a three-year period and then at one-year
intervals for a four-year period. The Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory (YPI; Andershed
et al. 2002), which is the instrument of focus in the current study, was first implemented at
the 6-month follow-up interview. However, because the current study performed analyses
that assumed equidistant measurement periods, only the 12-, 24-, 36-, 48-, 60-, 72-, and
84-month follow-up periods were used.

Measures

Youth Psychopathic Traits Inventory (Andershed et al. 2002). The YPI is a 50-item, four-
point (1-4) Likert scale self-report measure of features of psychopathy in adolescence. The
YPI items map onto ten subscales: Dishonest Charm (e.g., using charm to trick others),
Grandiosity (e.g., belief in being better than others), Lying (e.g., enjoying lying), Manipu-
lation (e.g., making people believe thing that are untrue), Remorselessness (e.g., absence
of guilt), Unemotionality (e.g., feeling calm in dangerous situations), Callousness (e.g.,
contempt for emotion), Thrill Seeking (e.g., wanting to be where the action is), Impulsiv-
ity (e.g., endorsing impulsive lifestyle), and Irresponsibility (e.g., missing work or school).
Across the seven waves of data used here, Cronbach’s alpha values for the ten subscales
ranged from 0.43 (Callousness) to 0.87 (Manipulation). Average subscale scores were
as follows: Dishonest Charm (M=9.53; SD=2.76), Grandiosity (M= 10.69; SD=2.29),
Lying (M=7.86; SD=2.11), Manipulation (M=8.88; SD=2.67), Remorselessness
(M=9.09; SD=2.21), Unemotionality (W=10.86; SD=2.06), Callousness (M=11.45;
SD=1.93), Thrill Seeking (M= 12.61; SD=2.53), Impulsivity (M= 10.96; SD=2.58), and
Irresponsibility (M=9.69; SD=2.30).

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 699

Given the novelty of research on psychopathy networks, especially in terms of how
they related to criminal behavior, focusing on the YPI’s 10 subscales rather than mod-
eling a network of all 50 items helped err on the side of parsimony. A between-subjects
network of all 50 items required modeling 1125 unique partial correlations for a single
network, which raised concerns about whether the current study had an appropriate
sample size for network modeling (Epskamp et al. 2018a). The focus on the ten sub-
scales was designed to strike a balance between looking at individual items and only
looking at the YPI’s Grandiose-Manipulative (GM), Callous-Unemotional (CU), and
Impulsive-Irresponsible (II) dimensions (Andershed et al. 2002). The aggregation of
features of psychopathy within these different dimensions did not allow for a more
precise understanding of which specific features of psychopathy were informative of
offending. The use of network analysis allowed for the inclusion of all ten subscales in
the same model. Doing so avoided prior concerns about testing the predictive validity
of different features of psychopathy in isolation as the psychopathy construct is more
than just the manifestation of a single feature (Salekin et al. 2018). It also allowed for a
more precise examination of how features of psychopathy related to offending (e.g., as
opposed to aggregating different interpersonal features into one dimension). However,
because other instruments, such as the PCL: YV, do not include these subscales, net-
work analyses were also reproduced using the YPI’s three dimensions (see Supplemen-
tary Materials), which more closely resemble the three-factor model initially identified
by Cooke and Michie (2001) and facilitate replication tests in future research.

Self Report of Offending (SRO; Huizinga et al. 1991). The SRO was administered at
each wave of data collection. Two items, (“ever went joyriding” and “ever broke into a
car to steal’) were not consistently administered and so a modified version of the SRO
was used to create an offending versatility scale based on a count of the number of
different self-reported offending behaviors (k= 22) engaged in between assessments.
The SRO included items measuring property damage, possession of stolen property,
drug possession and trafficking, and violent offenses. Examining offending versatility
helped capture an offending pattern that was not over-weighted by an individual’s fre-
quent involvement in minor crimes (Sweeten et al. 2013). Across the seven waves, the
average score on the SRO versatility scale was 1.21 (SD=1.50).

Missing Data

For the YPI, 68.1% of the sample had complete data across all waves. At any given
wave, no more than 16.5% of participants had missing data. For the SRO, 67.4% of the
sample had complete data across all waves. At any given wave, no more than 16.8% of
participants had missing data. Missing data were imputed using the missForest pack-
age for R (Stekhoven and Biihlmann 2012). This package was used to fit a random
statistical forest of regression trees for each node included in the network and used the
results to predict missing values on that node. Successful imputations are those with
normalized root mean squared error (NRMSE) values close to zero (Stekhoven and
BiihImann 2012), which was the case for the current study (NRMSE=0.0002). All net-
work analyses were run using the imputed dataset.

D) Springer
 700 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

Analytic Strategy

The graphicalVAR package (Epskamp 2017) for R (R Core Team 2017) was used to facili-
tate a more nuanced interpretation of the relationship between features of psychopathy and
offending versatility. This nuance included describing the structural properties of nodes in
the network to contextualize their statistical relationships and using both between-subjects
and within-individual perspectives to examine these relationships. This technique looks at
the extent to which each node is associated with all other nodes in the network. While this
involves modeling a large number of different associations, graphicalVAR uses the least
absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) as a regularization technique to help
avoid Type I error. Unlike Bonferroni and other correction techniques, this analysis is not
associated with a loss of statistical power (Epskamp and Fried 2018a). The LASSO uti-
lizes a tuning parameter that limits the sum of all partial correlation coefficients; all esti-
mated coefficients shrink, which reduces weak effect sizes to a magnitude of zero (..e.,
the removal of an edge between two nodes). This makes psychopathology network mod-
eling ideal for examining interrelationships between multiple features of psychopathy and
how these features relate to offending. The LASSO creates a sparser network by favoring
the removal of true edges over the inclusion of spurious ones (Epskamp and Fried 201 8a).
The tuning parameter is determined by estimating multiple networks defined by different
values of the tuning parameter and then selecting the optimal fit of the network according
to Extended Bayesian Information Criterion. In the current study, 2500 different models
were estimated (Epskamp et al. 2018c).

The ggraph package (Epskamp et al. 2017) in R was used to visualize the between-
subjects and within-individual network structures via the “spring” layout corresponding to
the Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm. The structural properties of these networks, includ-
ing which nodes are most central to the construct under examination, can be interpreted via
betweenness, closeness, and strength centrality indices (Opsahl et al. 2010). Betweenness
centrality describes the number of instances in which a node falls on the shortest path (..e.,
edge) between two other nodes. Closeness centrality represents the inverse of the sum of
the distances from all other nodes. Nodes higher in closeness centrality might help estab-
lish how conceptually distinct features of psychopathy come together to form the underly-
ing construct. Strength centrality refers to the sum of the absolute weight of all edges (e.g.,
partial correlation coefficients) of a given node. Examining the structural properties of the
network addressed questions about the relevance of interpersonal and affective features
versus behavioral and lifestyle features to the development of offending (Walters 2004,
2012) by identifying which features of psychopathy associated with offending versatility
were also among the most central nodes in the network.

The between-subjects network resembled traditional examinations of the predictive
validity of psychopathy in that it addressed whether higher scores on features of psychopa-
thy were informative of higher levels of offending versatility. Unlike traditional studies, the
between-subjects network was also informative of the structural properties of the relation-
ship between features of psychopathy and offending. As well, rather than rely on a sin-
gle-item indicator of offending measured at one time-point (1.e., recidivism), the between-
subjects network represented the average association between features of psychopathy and
offending versatility across all waves of data. The between-subjects network is a type of
Gaussian Graphical Model (GGM; see Epskamp et al. 2018c) in which undirected edges
indicate that two nodes are not independent, even after conditioning on all other nodes
in the network (.e., edges are parametrized using partial correlation coefficients). Thus,

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 701

the between-subjects network modeled the average relationship between a given YPI sub-
scale and offending versatility while conditioning on all other YPI subscales. This helped
account for interrelationships among different features of psychopathy that may be impor-
tant for better understanding how they relate to offending (e.g., Lilienfeld 2018).

Within-individual analyses provided more direct implications for DLC research. In
graphicalVAR, variance in the within-individual relationships between nodes is separated
into temporal and contemporaneous network structures. Both structures use person mean-
centering to remove between-subject variance in test scores. The temporal network meas-
ures directed relationships between lagged (lag-1 in the current study) and current nodes,
including autoregressive effects. Edges between nodes are represented by regression coef-
ficients indicating that a node at time t— 1 predicts a node at time f (the next wave of meas-
urement) after controlling for all other nodes at time t— 1 (Epskamp et al. 2018c). Thus, the
temporal network allowed for an examination of the influence of within-individual devia-
tions from average levels of a given feature of psychopathy at time t— 1 on deviations from
an individual’s average level of offending versatility at time ¢, while controlling for autore-
gressive effects. The autoregressive effects in the temporal network are also useful for
addressing personality researchers’ interest in ipsative stability (Robins et al. 2001). More
precisely, because an individual’s scores were centered around their mean, the autoregres-
sive effects are consistent with the scatter component of ipsative stability that deals with
variability of scores (see Cronbach and Gleser 1953). Positive autoregressive effects indi-
cate individual-level stability across measurement periods (Bringmann et al. 2018) and can
be used as evidence for ipsative stability. The contemporaneous network is a GGM that
measures undirected relationships between two nodes in the same measurement period
after conditioning on their relationship with all other nodes in that measurement period and
the previous measurement period (i.e., after controlling for lagged effects; Epskamp et al.
2018c). Thus, the contemporaneous network modeled the association between changes in
an individual’s typical level of a given feature of psychopathy at time ¢ and changes in an
individual’s typical level of offending versatility at time t, while conditioning on within-
individual change in all other nodes at time t— 1 and time tf.

Results
Between-Subjects Network

Beginning with structural properties of the network, of the100 possible edges among the
11 nodes, 46 were detected (see Fig. 1). Most edges were positive (73.9%). Offending ver-
satility was located on the periphery of the network. The three strongest edgeweights were
between the Manipulativeness and Dishonest Charm subscales (interpersonal features),
Remorselessness and Unemotionality subscales (affective features), and Thrill Seeking
and Impulsivity subscales (behavioral features). To first assess the reliability of the cen-
trality indices, the bootnet package (Epskamp and Fried 2018b) for R was used to meas-
ure the correlation stability (CS) coefficient, which represents the maximum proportion
of the sample that can be dropped while maintaining a 95% probability that the correla-
tion between the baseline centrality index and bootstrapped subsamples is 0.70 or higher.
Values above 0.50 are preferable for indicating the reliability of the measure of centrality
in question (Epskamp et al. 2018a). This was the case for closeness (0.67) and strength
(0.75) CS-coefficients. For these indexes, more than half the sample can be dropped while

D) Springer
 702 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

Fig. 1 Between-subjects network
structure. Notes The weight of an
edge is determined by the magni-
tude of the effect size. Blue edges
represent positive associations;
red edges represent negative
associations. The Fruchterman-
Reingold layout was used to
display the network structure
(Color figure online)

retaining a correlation with the baseline centrality index of 0.70 or higher. The between-
ness centrality CS-coefficient was 0.44, which is higher than the 0.25 lower-bound limit
and thus can also be interpreted reliably.

Centrality indices (Fig. 2) indicated that offending versatility was the least central node
in the network, with betweenness, closeness, and strength centrality values that were one
standard deviation below the mean. On the other hand, the Remorselessness subscale had
betweenness, closeness, and strength centrality values that were one standard deviation
above the mean. This subscale was one of only two nodes that did not have any nega-
tive edges in the network. Dishonest Charm was the other, but only had four total connec-
tions in the network. The between-subjects network structure showed that affective (top),
interpersonal (right-hand side), and behavioral (left-hand side) features tended to cluster
together. The Remorselessness subscale formed a bridge between these nodes that helped
features of psychopathy become a constellation of traits as opposed to a set of independent
indicators. If an individual did not score high on the Remorseless subscale, it was unlikely
that they would be characterized by the full psychopathy construct.

In terms of statistical associations between features of psychopathy and offending, indi-
viduals that averaged higher scores on the Lying and Grandiosity subscales averaged lower
levels of offending versatility. Higher average scores on the Callousness, Irresponsibility,
Manipulation, Remorselessness, Thrill Seeking, and Unemotionality subscales of the YPI

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 703

Betweenness Closeness InStrength OutStrength Strength

Versatility

Unemo

Thrill

Remorse 7

Manip 4

group
—’e Between—Subjects

Lying — Contemporaneous

~~ Temporal

Irresp

Imp

Grand

Charm

Callous

Li J

re se | [oe | LJ '
7x QO N® 2x Ons go ™ Y7~ QS FES ON

Fig. 2 Centrality indices for the between-subjects, temporal, and contemporaneous networks. Notes Nodes
are plotted on the y-axis and z-scores representing the centrality indices are plotted on the x-axis. Average
values are represented by z-score values of zero, which are not always located in the centre of each graph.
See online article for color version of figure (Color figure online)

were associated with higher average levels of offending versatility. The Remorselessness
and Manipulation subscales were also among the most central nodes in the network. In
contrast, the Callousness, Irresponsibility, and Unemotionality subscales were among the
least central in the network. In other words, not all statistical associations with offending
versatility were equally important. For example, lower levels of irresponsibility, although
directly associated with lower levels of offending, had minimal indirect associations with
offending given this node’s lack of connectivity to other nodes in the network. In contrast,
higher levels of remorselessness were directly associated with higher levels of offending.
Remorselessness also had multiple indirect associations with offending as this node had

G) Springer
 704 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

the highest level of betweenness centrality. The structural properties of the network implied
that nodal proximity was not necessarily important for statistical association. For example,
despite their proximity, the Impulsivity subscale was not associated with offending versatil-
ity. This may be because of the Impulsivity subscale’s structural similarity® to the Thrill
Seeking subscale, which was associated with offending versatility.

Lilienfeld’s (2018) review of recent research highlighted the importance of examining
statistical associations between features of psychopathy when examining how such features
related to offending. Psychopathology network analyses illustrated why doing so is impor-
tant. A reanalysis of the network (not shown) was performed after removing the Thrill
Seeking subscale given its similar structural position to the Impulsivity subscale. After
removing this node there was a positive edge between the Impulsivity subscale and offend-
ing versatility. In effect, spurious associations between a given feature of psychopathy and
offending may emerge when failing to condition on other features of psychopathy. Using
partial correlations helped condition on these features and also showed that nodal proxim-
ity was not necessarily important for statistical association. Indeed, the structural properties
of this network showed that although the Grandiosity, Unemotionality, and Manipulation
subscales were among the nodes most distant from offending versatility, they nevertheless
shared an edge with this node. Nodes that share an edge but are further away in the network
indicate conceptual distinctiveness in that they lack shared relationships with other nodes.
In the context of the current analyses, interpersonal and affective dimensions of psychopa-
thy that shared an edge with offending versatility tended to be distant from one another in
the network. This would suggest that offending versatility is more likely an outcome, rather
than a specific feature, of psychopathy.

The utility of psychopathology network modeling rests on its ability to provide results
that are more nuanced and/or more reliable compared to traditional analyses. Using com-
plete case data at the baseline assessment, correlations between offending versatility and
each YPI subscale were examined after conditioning on all other YPI subscales. Only
Manipulation (r,=.066, p=.020), Remorselessness (r,=.064, p=.024), Callousness
(r,=.138, p<.001), Thrill Seeking (r,=.096, p=.001), and Irresponsibility (r,=.161,
p<.001) were significantly and positively correlated with offending versatility. However,
after applying a Bonferroni correction (.05/10), the Remorselessness and Manipulation
subscales were no longer significantly associated with offending versatility (p >.005). In
contrast, the between-subjects network, after applying the LASSO tuning parameter to
remove spurious edges without losing statistical power (Epskamp and Fried 201 8a), identi-
fied the Remorselessness and Manipulation subscales as positively associated with offend-
ing versatility. Critically, the between-subjects network illustrated that these subscales
were two of the most important nodes in the network whereas traditional analyses did not
include an examination of the structural location and centrality of these variables.

Within-Individual Networks

Within-individual change described an individual’s deviation from their own average level
on a particular node and was modeled in two ways (see Fig. 3). The temporal network rep-
resented a within-individual analysis of the cross-lagged (lag-1) relationships between all

3 Although structurally similar, the goldbricker function for the R package networktools (Jones, 2017)
showed no suggestions for removing redundant nodes to reduce the network.

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 705

Temporal Contemporaneous

_ Manip
Irresp —
(om

Fig. 3 Within-individual analyses represented by temporal and contemporaneous network structures. Notes
The weight of an edge is determined by the magnitude of the effect size. Directed arrows represent lagged
effects (lag-1). Self-looping arrows indicate autoregressive effects. The color of the arrow indicates a posi-
tive (blue) or negative (red) effect. Between-subject variance was removed via person mean-centering. The
Fruchterman-—Reingold layout was used to display the network structure (Color figure online)

nodes in the network. The contemporaneous network modeled whether within-individual
change in node “A” at time ¢ was associated with within-individual change in node “B” a
time ¢ while controlling for all other nodes in this network as well as the effects modeled in
the temporal network (1.e., time t— 1).

The temporal network was particularly sparse. Only 22 of a possible 111 edges were
observed. Eleven of these edges were negative autoregressive effects indicating a “‘jig-
saw pattern” (Bringmann et al. 2018: 3) in which an individual’s test score on a par-
ticular node, if higher than their personal average at time t—1, predicted a test score
on that same node at time ¢ that was lower than their personal average. In other words,
YPI subscale scores and offending versatility lacked ipsative stability between waves.
The positive cross-lagged effects in the network provided greater context as to why
the Manipulation, Remorselessness, Thrill Seeking, and Lying subscales were central
nodes in the between-subjects network (see Fig. 2). Within-individual change on the
Manipulation subscale was particularly important for exerting later within-individual
change on other features of psychopathy. An individual’s Manipulation subscale score at
time t— 1, when lower than their personal average, predicted test scores on the Dishon-
est Charm, Thrill Seeking, and Remorselessness nodes at time t that were also lower
than their personal averages. Yet, the Manipulation subscale also had an in-strength

D) Springer
 706 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

centrality value that was one standard deviation above the mean. This was because the
Lying subscale exerted a strong cross-lagged effect on the Manipulation subscale. In
other words, the Lying subscale was important for influencing a node that was important
for influencing other key nodes in the network. One of these key nodes was Remorse-
lessness, which was a critical feature of psychopathy yet also amenable to change via
cross-lagged effects from other features of psychopathy. Specifically, an individual’s
Callousness, Manipulation, and Dishonest Charm test scores at time t—1, when lower
than their personal average, predicted test scores on the Remorselessness subscale at
time ¢ that were also lower than their personal average.

There was no relationship between an individual’s scores on the YPI subscales at
time t—1 and offending versatility at time t. The number of negative autoregressive
effects in the temporal network may have contributed to difficulties identifying posi-
tive lagged effects between YPI subscales and offending versatility. The temporal net-
work examines directed lagged effects while controlling for autoregressive effects. The
lagged effect of a YPI subscale on later criminal versatility may be accounted for by the
lagged changes on that YPI subscale captured by autoregressive effects. As well, over
the course of the study, there may have been instances where an individual had higher
than average YPI subscale scores at t—1 but their level of criminal versatility failed to
change between time t— 1 and time ¢. As such, the variability of YPI subscales and vari-
ability of criminal versatility may not have always aligned so that YPI test scores that
were higher at time ¢-1 than an individual’s personal average were predicting criminal
versatility scores that at time ft were higher than that individual’s personal average (i.e.,
higher YPI test scores being used to predict criminal versatility during its downcycle).
A sparse temporal network implies that a contemporaneous network should be exam-
ined, as the impact of within-individual change may occur in a window that is shorter
than what was captured between time t— 1 and time ¢ (Epskamp et al. 2018c).

The contemporaneous network (right-hand side of Fig. 3) showed that offending ver-
satility was located on the network’s periphery. This peripheral location was at least
partially influenced by behavioral features of psychopathy. Specifically, the Thrill Seek-
ing, Unemotionality, and Grandiosity nodes were characterized by a chained relation-
ship that formed a partition between offending versatility and the other nodes in the
network. Like the between-subjects network, the Remorselessness subscale was one
standard deviation above the mean for all three centrality indices. This subscale was key
for bridging together interpersonal and behavioral features as part of the development
of psychopathy. Indeed, within-individual change in levels of remorse at time ft were
positively associated with within-individual change in all other YPI subscales at time tf.

The contemporaneous network indicated that the association between within-individ-
ual changes in features of psychopathy and within-individual changes in offending ver-
satility occurred within the same window of measurement (i.e., within an interval that
was shorter than the period captured by the lagged association). An individual’s level
of Dishonest Charm, Irresponsibility, Manipulation, Remorselessness, and Thrill Seek-
ing, when higher than their personal average, were positively associated with, within the
same window of measurement, offending versatility. Grandiosity was inversely associ-
ated with offending versatility. These findings resembled the between-subjects network
in Fig. | but had more direct implications for treatment and for DLC research. Spe-
cifically, when an individual’s interpersonal, affective, and behavioral test scores were
higher than their personal average, this same individual tended to have, within that same
window of measurement, a level of offending versatility that was also higher than their
personal average.

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 707

Discussion

Arguments for the incorporation of psychopathy into mainstream criminological theory
and research (DeLisi 2016; Farrington 2005; Fox et al. 2015) have been challenged by
empirical observations that interpersonal and affective features added little to explana-
tions of offending beyond the contributions of features resembling low self control (e.g.,
Edens et al. 2007; Walters 2012). However, at least two caveats associated with this
research justified a closer examination of the importance of psychopathy to offending.
First, research was needed that clarified the relative importance of different features of
psychopathy, as well as interrelationships among these features, as opposed to examin-
ing these different features in isolation (Lilienfeld 2018; Ridder and Kosson 2018). Sec-
ond, research on psychopathy and offending has often focused on single-item indictors
of offending measured at one time-period, which does not comport with important the-
oretical questions in criminology regarding the longitudinal relationship between risk
factors and offending outcomes (e.g., DLC criminology’s emphasis on within-individual
change; Loeber and Le Blanc 1990).

The current study used psychopathology network modeling as an analytic strategy
capable of (a) addressing interrelationships among features of psychopathy and how
they relate to offending and (b) examining such relationships from both between-sub-
jects and within-individual perspectives that align with DLC criminology and the per-
son-oriented paradigm (Bergman and Magnusson 1997). Seven waves of annual data
from the Pathways to Desistance Study (n= 1354) were used to examine the network
structure of YPI subscales and the SRO versatility scale. Results are summarized in
Table 1. Controlling for behavioral features, several interpersonal and affective features
of psychopathy were associated with offending, and this was true for both between-sub-
jects and within-individual analyses. Importantly, the features that were associated with
criminal versatility were also identified as core features of psychopathy (e.g., remorse-
lessness, manipulation) as per different indicators of network centrality.

The importance of examining interpersonal, affective, and behavioral dimensions as
opposed to total scores on a measure of psychopathy has been recently noted (Salekin
et al. 2018). The current study illustrated that it may be beneficial to examine the spe-
cific features that underlie these dimensions. For example, analyses of the YPI’s three
dimensions (GM, CU, and II; see Supplementary Material) showed that the GM dimen-
sion was unrelated to offending versatility in the between-subject network. This was
likely a consequence of aggregating subscales that were positively related to offending
versatility .e., Manipulation and Dishonest Charm subscales) and subscales that were
negatively related to offending versatility (.e., Grandiosity and Lying). In effect, disag-
gregating the GM dimension across its four subscales helped clarify the specific mech-
anisms by which dimensions of psychopathy are related to offending (Lee 2018). As
well, although several specific features of psychopathy were associated with offending
in the within-individual networks, such relationships were not found when aggregated
into GM, CU, and IJ dimensions and examined in the Supplementary Materials. Thus,
for criminological research and theory, aggregation of features of psychopathy into their
respective dimensions or into total scores may mask their importance to offending. This
is not to say that psychopathy as a general construct is not important to understanding
offending; features unrelated to offending may nevertheless be related to other impor-
tant outcomes that in turn are related to offending (e.g., treatment completion and thera-
peutic change; Sewall and Olver 2019).

D) Springer
 708 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

Table 1 Summary of findings

Node Between-subjects Temporal network Contem-

network poraneous
network

Associations with offending versatility

Callousness +

Dishonest Charm , , +

Grandiosity - , -

Impulsivity

Irresponsibility + , +

Lying -

Manipulation + +

Remorselessness + +

Thrill Seeking + +

Unemotionality +

Network centrality

Offending versatility BI,Cl, S| BI, S|’ BI,C|, S|

Callousness BI BJ, Cl, SJ

Dishonest Charm , , ST

Grandiosity BJ,C], SJ S|" BI

Impulsivity ,

Irresponsibility BI, SJ ,

Lying Ct Bt, St" ,

Manipulation Bt, St St", St’ St

Remorselessness Bt, Ct, ST St, S|! Bt, Ct, St

Thrill Seeking ; Bt, St Bt

Unemotionality Ct S|" Bt, CT

+ positive relationship. — negative relationship. B betweenness centrality; C closeness centrality; S strength
centrality

| Centrality value greater than one standard deviation below the average
tCentrality value greater than one standard deviation above the average
“In-strength centrality

‘Out-strength centrality

The Importance of Psychopathology Network Modeling

Psychopathology network modeling departed from traditional conceptualizations of psy-
chopathy as a latent construct (see Cooke et al. 2007). Whereas the psychopathology
network perspective assumes that symptoms are part of a causal system and thus share
important interrelationships, in latent variable modeling, covariance between symptoms of
a disorder are assumed to result from their shared dependence with a common cause; once
the higher-order common cause (e.g., psychopathy) is accounted for, these different symp-
toms are considered locally independent (Borsboom and Cramer 2013). Psychopathology
network modeling was useful for measuring the interrelationships among a constellation of
co-occurring features that comprise the psychopathy construct while also indicating which
of these features related to offending. Edges were identified after the analyses used a tuning

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 709

parameter to avoid Type I error by removing spurious associations. Although the current
study investigated the impact of individual features of psychopathy on offending, it was
also informative of the nature of the overarching construct. The network models, especially
the temporal network that identified directed relationships, suggested that these features
may not be independent of one another. The Remorseless subscale was especially impor-
tant for understanding the interconnectivity of these different features that were related
to offending. In effect, 1f psychopathy is a multidimensional construct (Lilienfeld 2018),
remorselessness helps to understand how symptoms come together as well as why psy-
chopathy is related to offending. The importance of a lack of remorse is also evidence that
when looking at affective features of psychopathy, CU traits is not enough (Salekin et al.
2018).

The temporal network structure directly examined the influence of features of psychopa-
thy on one another (Borsboom and Cramer 2013). This helped understand, for example,
that within-individual changes in callousness, manipulativeness, and dishonest charm
directly influenced later changes in remorselessness. Changes in specific features of psy-
chopathy had cascading effects on a feature of psychopathy that was critical to the for-
mation of the general construct (i.e., remorselessness bridged together otherwise uncon-
nected interpersonal and behavioral features). Interpersonal deficits at time t—1 reduced
an individual’s lack of remorse at time ¢. Although challenges in directly treating affective
features have been noted (e.g., Olver et al. 2013a), treating interpersonal deficits may help
indirectly improve affective features.

Nodes tended to cluster together according to whether they belonged to interpersonal,
affective, or behavioral dimensions of psychopathy. However, a unique contribution of psy-
chopathology network modeling was that its illustration of network structure helped reveal
how conceptually distinct interpersonal, affective, and behavioral features came together to
form the multidimensional psychopathy construct. Specifically, the Remorselessness sub-
scale was a central component that bridged together various interpersonal, affective, and
behavioral features to formulate a cohesive, super-ordinate construct (see Neumann et al.
2007).

The network analysis was also unique from traditional approaches in that it helped
contextualize the relationships between different features of psychopathy and offending
by, for example, examining whether the core structural features of psychopathy were also
important for the development of offending. In the current study, the Remorselessness
and Manipulation subscales stood out as being highly central in the between-subjects and
within-individual network structures while also being associated with offending versatil-
ity. These findings contrasted with recidivism studies that showed that only behavioral and
antisocial features of psychopathy predicted recidivism (e.g., Edens et al. 2007; Walters
2012).

Impulsivity and offending versatility did not share an edge in the between-subjects net-
work, which contrasted with conceptual assertions and empirical observations that the rela-
tionship between features of psychopathy and offending was accounted for by features of
low self control (e.g., Walters 2004, 2012). The non-association resulted from the network
approach’s use of partial correlations to condition on other features of psychopathy. Thus,
network modeling was useful for testing Lilienfeld’s (2018) recommendation that statis-
tical associations among features of psychopathy should be accounted for when examin-
ing the relationship between specific features and offending (also see Ridder and Kosson
2018; Salekin et al. 2018). Conceptual similarity, denoted by network proximity, was not
necessarily important for statistical association. The YPI subscales associated with offend-
ing versatility tended to be distant from each other; impulsivity was closest to offending

D) Springer
 710 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

versatility yet was not associated with offending versatility. If nodes are close together (1.e.,
conceptually similar), failure to condition on their relationship with other nodes may result
in spurious connections.

Implications for DLC Research

The negative autoregressive effect observed for offending versatility suggested that indi-
viduals moved in a “jigsaw” pattern (Bringmann et al. 2018: 3) that was analogous to Laub
and Sampson’s (2003) zig-zag characterization of offending intermittency as a common
pattern of offending over the criminal career. Similarly, the negative autoregressive effect
observed for all 10 YPI subscales provided further evidence that features of psychopathy
between adolescence and emerging adulthood lack stability (also see McCuish and Lussier
2018). We were unable to rule out the possibility that the autoregressive effects were due
to individuals experiencing temporary treatment effects that resulted in a decrease in test
scores followed by a return to baseline. Nevertheless, the findings imply that there is a lack
of ipsative stability of features of psychopathy, at least when it comes to the within-individ-
ual variability of YPI subscale scores over yearly measurement periods.

Psychopathology network modeling also contributed to DLC research by examining the
within-individual relationship between features of psychopathy and offending. By sepa-
rating within-individual variance in the relationship between features of psychopathy and
offending into temporal and contemporaneous networks, the current study indicated that
features of psychopathy and offending moved in lock-step, at least when measured over the
same one-year period. This was shown in the contemporaneous network, where there were
several positive associations between features of psychopathy and offending versatility. In
the temporal network, negative autoregressive effects helped explain the lack of a lagged
effect of YPI features on offending versatility. The contemporaneous network showed that
there was a relationship between core features of psychopathy and offending versatility but
could not establish the direction of this relationship because both were measured during the
same wave of data collection. Capturing a directed relationship between features of psy-
chopathy and offending likely required examining lagged effects within a shorter interval.

Limitations and Future Research

The current study relied on a single source (1.e., the participant) for all measures and thus
suffers from mono-operation bias. Individuals that averaged higher scores on the Lying
subscale also averaged lower levels of offending versatility. It may be the case that individ-
uals that averaged higher scores on the Lying subscale were simply more likely to underre-
port their involvement in criminal behavior. It was not possible to examine this hypothesis
using the current data. There are also concerns about the reliability of self-report measures
of psychopathy (Hart and Cook 2012) that may apply to the YPI. For example, the Callous-
ness subscale was among the least central nodes in the network. A rival plausible expla-
nation is that youth have a relatively limited ability to accurately self-assess callousness.
Indeed, the Callousness subscale was associated with low Cronbach’s alpha values (rang-
ing from 0.43 to 0.85 across waves). Despite its low reliability, callousness was retained in
the network model because of its conceptual importance to psychopathy (McCuish et al.
2019) and because its removal did not impact the structure of the network.

Most research using longitudinal networks of symptoms of mental disorders relied on
experience sampling methods in which a smaller number of participants provided data

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 711

over many observation periods (e.g., Epskamp et al. 2018c). The current study relied on
just seven observation periods. However, across 1354 participants this still resulted in over
9000 observation points. The limited number of waves of data were more likely to increase
the likelihood of failing to observe true edges as opposed to increasing the likelihood of
observing spurious edges (Epskamp et al. 2018c). Finally, graphical-VAR assumes an
invariant mean and covariance structure of all nodes in the network (i.e., weak stationar-
ity). For the YPI subscales and SRO, a slight downward trend in mean test scores was
observed. Differencing was applied to the data by subtracting each test score’s value at the
previous measurement period from the value at the current measurement period. Analyses
of the differenced data were relatively similar (available from the first author), with the
main difference being fewer cross-lagged associations in the temporal network, which was
expected [see the supplementary materials provided by Epskamp et al. (2018b)]. The cur-
rent study was unable to address whether participants received interventions that improved
their features of psychopathy. Such interventions may explain the downward trend in YPI
test scores between baseline and final assessment. A rival explanation for this decline is
that changes in general personality features occur through improvements in maturation
(Blonigen 2010) and all participants in the current study passed through a developmental
period characterized by major maturational change (Arnett 2000).

Recent advances in psychopathology network modeling allow for comparisons of
whether network structure and statistical associations within the network are invariant
across different groups of individuals (e.g., McElroy et al. 2018). Future research should
utilize the logic of this analysis to examine whether the features of psychopathy most
strongly related to criminal behavior vary over age. Future research should also examine
whether the relationship between specific features of psychopathy and offending varies
according to the type of offending outcome examined, over higher versus lower test scores,
and across males versus females.

Conclusion

The current study used psychopathology network modeling to examine the longitudinal
relationship between different features of psychopathy and offending using both between-
subjects and within-individual analyses. This approach utilized information about the struc-
tural properties and network location of different features of psychopathy and offending to
help contextualize the statistical relationship between the two. Offending versatility was
on the periphery of the network and may be better considered as an outcome rather than
a symptom of psychopathy. Interpersonal and affective features were especially central to
the network. Remorselessness helped bridge conceptually distinct features of psychopathy
together and may be critical for understanding the origins of psychopathy. Several of these
core interpersonal and affective features were associated with offending versatility, and
this was true from both between-subjects and within-individual perspectives. Thus, these
findings supported calls for the integration of psychopathy into criminological theory and
research (e.g., Fox et al. 2015). However, these findings also suggested that not all features
of psychopathy are equally important to offending. Aggregating features into interpersonal,
affective, and behavioral dimensions may mask important relationships between these fea-
tures and offending. Overall, findings supported prior arguments that research should not
restrict itself to examining only certain features of psychopathy (e.g., CU traits; see Salekin
et al. 2018).

D) Springer
 712 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

References

Andershed H, Kerr M, Stattin H, Levander S (2002) Psychopathic traits in non-referred youths: a new
assessment tool. In: Blau E, Sheridan L (eds) Psychopaths: current international perspectives. Else-
vier, Amsterdam, pp 131-158

Arnett JJ (2000) Emerging adulthood: a theory of development from the late teens through the twenties.
Am Psychol 55:469-480

Bergman LR, Magnusson D (1997) A person-oriented approach in research on developmental psychopa-
thology. Dev Psychopathol 9:291-—319

Blonigen DM (2010) Explaining the relationship between age and crime: contributions from the devel-
opmental literature on personality. Clin Psychol Rev 30:89—100

Borsboom D, Cramer AOJ (2013) Network analysis: an integrative approach to the structure of psycho-
pathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 9:91-121

Bouchard M, Malm A (2016) Social network analysis and its contribution to research on crime and
criminal justice. Oxford Handbooks Online, pp 1-26

Bringmann LF, Ferrer E, Hamaker EL, Borsboom D, Tuerlinckx F (2018) Modeling nonstationary emo-
tion dynamics in dyads using a time-varying vector-autoregressive model. Multivar Behav Res
53:293-314

Colins OF, Vermeiren R, De Bolle M, Broekaert E (2012) Self-reported psychopathic-like traits as predic-
tors of recidivism in detained male adolescents. Crim Just Behav 39:1421—1435

Colins OF, Andershed H, Pardini DA (2015) Psychopathic traits as predictors of future criminality, intimate
partner aggression, and substance use in young adult men. Law Hum Behav 39:547-558

Cooke DJ, Michie C (1997) An item response theory analysis of the hare psychopathy checklist-revised.
Psychol Assess 9:3—14

Cooke DJ, Michie C (2001) Refining the construct of psychopathy: towards a hierarchical model. Psychol
Assess 13:171-188

Cooke DJ, Michie C, Skeem J (2007) Understanding the structure of the psychopathy checklist-revised: an
exploration of methodological confusion. Br J Psychiatry 190:s39-s50

Corrado RR, DeLisi M, Hart SD, McCuish EC (2015) Can the causal mechanisms underlying chronic,
serious, and violent offending trajectories be elucidated using the psychopathy construct? J Crim Just
43:251-261

Cronbach LJ, Gleser GC (1953) Assessing similarity between profiles. Psychol Bull 50:456—473

DeLisi M (2016) Psychopathy as unified theory of crime. Palgrave Macmillan, New York

DeLisi M, Tostlebe J, Burgason K, Heirigs M, & Vaughn M (2018) Self-control versus psychopathy: A
head-to-head test of general theories of antisociality. Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice 16:53-76

Edens JF, Campbell JS, Weir JM (2007) Youth psychopathy and criminal recidivism: a meta-analysis of the
psychopathy checklist measures. Law Hum Behav 31:53-—75

Epskamp S (2017) graphicalVAR: graphical VAR for experience sampling data (R package version 0.2.1)
[Computer software manual]. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=graphical VAR

Epskamp S, Fried EI (2018a) A tutorial on regularized partial correlation networks. Psychol Methods
23(4):1-18

Epskamp S, Fried EI (2018b) Package “bootnet’. Retrieved from https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/
bootnet/bootnet.pdf. Accessed 15 Mar 2020

Epskamp S, Costantini G, Haslbeck J, Cramer AOJ, WaldropLJ, Schmittmann VD, Borsboom D (2017)
qgraph: graph plotting methods, psychometric data visualization and graphical model estimation (R
Package version 1.5) [Computer software manual]. Retrieved from https://cran.r-project.org/web/packa
ges/qgraph/qgraph.pdf

Epskamp S, Borsboom D, Fried EI (2018a) Estimating psychological networks and their accuracy: a tutorial
paper. Behav Res Methods 50:195-—212

Epskamp S, van Borkulo CD, van der Veen DC, Servaas MN, Isvoranu AM, Riese H, Cramer AO (2018b)
Personalized network modeling in psychopathology: the importance of contemporaneous and temporal
connections. Clin Psychol Sci 6:416—-427

Epskamp S, Waldorp LJ, Mottus R, Borsboom D (2018c) Discovering psychological dynamics: the Gauss-
ian graphical model in cross-sectional and time-series data. Multivar Behav Res 1-29

Fanti KA, Kyranides MN, Lordos A, Colins OF, Andershed H (2018) Unique and interactive associations
of callous-unemotional traits, impulsivity and grandiosity with child and adolescent conduct disorder
symptoms. J Psychopathol Behav Assess 40:40-49

Farrington DP (2005) The importance of child and adolescent psychopathy. J Abnorm Child Psychol
33:489-497

Freeman L (1977) A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry 40:35—-41

D) Springer
 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714 713

Fox BH, Jennings WG, & Farrington DP (2015) Bringing psychopathy into developmental and life-
course criminology theories and research. J Crim Justice 43:274—289

Gottfredson M, Hirschi T (1990) A general theory of crime. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA

Gottfried ED, Harrop TM, Anestis JC, Venables NC, Sellbom M (2019) An examination of triarchic
psychopathy constructs in female offenders. J Pers Assess 101:455—467

Hare RD, Neumann GS (2010) The role of antisociality in the psychopathy construct: comment on
Skeem and Cooke 2010. Psychol Assess 22:446—454

Hart SD (1998) The role of psychopathy in assessing risk for violence: conceptual and methodological
issues. Legal Criminol Psychol 3:121—137

Hart SD, Cook AN (2012) Current issues in the assessment and diagnosis of psychopathy (psychopathic
personality disorder). Neuropsychiatry 2:497-508

Huizinga D, Esbensen FA, Weiher AW (1991) Are there multiple paths to delinquency? J Crim Law
Criminol 82:83-118

Kennealy PJ, Skeem JL, Walters GD, Camp J (2010) Do core interpersonal and affective traits of PCL-R
psychopathy interact with antisocial behavior and disinhibition to predict violence? Psychol Assess
22:569-580

Knoke D, Yang S (2008) Social network analysis, 2nd edn. Sage, Thousand Oaks

Kreis MF, Cooke DJ, Michie C, Hoff HA, Logan C (2012) The comprehensive assessment of psycho-
pathic personality (CAPP): content validation using prototypical analysis. J Pers Disord 26:402—413

Laub JH, Sampson RJ (2003) Shared beginnings, divergent lives: delinquent boys to age 70. Harvard
University Press, Massachusetts

Lee SS (2018) Multidimensionality of youth psychopathic traits: validation and future directions. J Psy-
chopathol Behav Assess 40:86—92

Leistico AMR, Salekin RT, DeCoster J, Rogers R (2008) A large-scale meta-analysis relating the Hare
measures of psychopathy to antisocial conduct. Law Hum Behav 32:28—45

Lilienfeld SO (2018) The multidimensional nature of psychopathy: five recommendations for research. J
Psychopathol Behav Assess 40:79-85

Lilienfeld SO, Watts AL, Murphy B, Costello TH, Bowes SM, Smith SF et al (2019) Personality dis-
orders as emergent interpersonal syndromes: psychopathic personality as a case example. J Pers
Disord 33:577-622

Loeber R, Le Blanc M (1990) Toward a developmental criminology. Crime Just 12:375—473

McCuish EC, Lussier P (2018) A developmental perspective on the stability and change of psychopathic
personality traits across the adolescence—adulthood transition. Crim Justice Behav 45:666—692

McElroy E, Shevlin M, Murphy J, McBride O (2018) Co-occurring internalizing and externalizing psy-
chopathology in childhood and adolescence: a network approach. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
27:1-9

McGloin JM, Kirk DS (2010) Social network analysis. In: Piquero AR, Weisburd D (eds) Handbook of
quantitative criminology. Springer, New York, pp 209-224

McCuish E, Bouchard M, Beauregard E, & Corrado R (2019) A network approach to understanding
the structure of core symptoms of psychopathic personality disturbance in adolescent offenders. J
Abnorm Child Psychol 47:1467—1482

Mulvey E (2013) Research on Pathways to Desistance [Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County,
PA]: Subject Measures, 2000-2010. ICPSR29961-v2. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research [distributor], 01 July 2013

Nagin D, & Paternoster R (2000) Population heterogeneity and state dependence: State of the evidence
and directions for future research. J Quant Criminol 16:117-—144

Neumann CS, Hare RD, Newman JP (2007) The super-ordinate nature of the Psychopathy Checklist-
Revised. J Pers Disord 21:102—117

Olver ME, Lewis K, Wong SC (2013a) Risk reduction treatment of high-risk psychopathic offenders: the
relationship of psychopathy and treatment change to violent recidivism. Pers Disorders Theory Res
Treat 4:160-167

Olver ME, Neumann CS, Wong SC, Hare RD (2013b) The structural and predictive properties of the
Psychopathy Checklist-Revised in Canadian Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal offenders. Psychol
Assess 25:167-179

Opsahl T, Agneessens F, Skvoretz J (2010) Node centrality in weighted networks: generalizing degree
and shortest paths. Soc Netw 32:245-251

Preszler J, Marcus DK, Edens JF, McDermott BE (2018) Network analysis of psychopathy in forensic
patients. J Abnorm Psychol 127:171—182

R Core Team (2017) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statisti-
cal Computing, Vienna

D) Springer
 714 Journal of Quantitative Criminology (2021) 37:693-714

Ridder KA, Kosson DS (2018) Investigating the components of psychopathic traits in youth offenders. J
Psychopathol Behav Assess 40:60—68

Robins RW, Fraley RC, Roberts BW, Trzesniewski KH (2001) A longitudinal study of personality change in
young adulthood. J Pers 69:617—640

Salekin RT (2016) Psychopathy in childhood: toward better informing the DSM-—5 and ICD-11 conduct dis-
order specifiers. Pers Disorders Theory Res Treat 7:180-191

Salekin RT, Andershed H, Batky BD, Bontemps AP (2018) Are callous unemotional (CU) traits enough?
Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment 40:1-—5

Sewall LA, Olver ME (2019) Psychopathy and treatment outcome: results from a sexual violence reduction
program. Pers Disorders Theory Res Treat 10:59-69

Skeem JL, Cooke DJ (2010) Is criminal behavior a central component of psychopathy? Conceptual direc-
tions for resolving the debate. Psychol Assess 22:433-445

Stekhoven DJ, Biihlmann P (2012) MissForest—non-parametric missing value imputation for mixed-type
data. Bioinformatics 28:112-118

Sweeten G, Pyrooz DC, Piquero AR (2013) Disengaging from gangs and desistance from crime. Just Q
30:469-500

Vahl P, Colins OF, Lodewijks HP, Markus MT, Doreleyers TA, Vermeiren RR (2014) Psychopathic-
like traits in detained adolescents: clinical usefulness of self-report. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
23:69 1-699

Verschuere B, van Ghesel Grothe S, Waldorp L, Watts AL, Lilienfeld SO, Edens JF et al (2018) What fea-
tures of psychopathy might be central? A network analysis of the psychopathy checklist-revised (PCL-
R) in three large samples. J Abnorm Psychol 127:51-65

Walters GD (2004) The trouble with psychopathy as a general theory of crime. Int J Offender Ther Comp
Criminol 48:133-148

Walters GD (2012) Psychopathy and crime: testing the incremental validity of PCL-R-measured psychopa-
thy as a predictor of general and violent recidivism. Law Hum Behav 36:404—412

Walters GD (2015) A multi-wave cross-lagged regression analysis of the youth psychopathic traits inventory
and self-reported offending. J Crim Just 43:327—336

Wasserman S, Faust K (1994) Social network analysis: methods and applications. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Affiliations

Evan McCuish'® - Martin Bouchard! - Eric Beauregard

Martin Bouchard
mbouchard @ sfu.ca

Eric Beauregard
ebeaureg @sfu.ca

School of Criminology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6,
Canada

D) Springer
